abashed: (adj) Abashed indicates a state of embarrassment.
abate: (vb) To abate is to lessen or diminish.
abdicate: (vb) To abdicate is to step down, as from a throne, or give something up.
aberrant: (adj) Its literal meaning implies a straying from the normal, usual, or customary way.
abominate: (vb) When you abominate something or somebody, you loathe, hate, abhor, detest him, her, or it.
abrasive: (n, adj) an abrasive is any substance that can be used for polishing or grinding, like sandpaper or pumice. Figuratively, it applies to people and their personalities.
abrogate: (vb) When a law is abrogated, it is repealed. It implies a repeal, annulment, or cancellation.
abstemious: (adj) An abstemious person is not necessarily a teetotaler; he eats and drinks sparingly.
abstinent: (adj) Its general meaning is "self-denying, self-restraining," but more specifically and commonly, control in the matter of the intake of alcohol is to be inferred.
abstruse: (adj) Abstruse explanations of theories may be clear to the person expounding them, but unintelligible to those on the receiving end.
accolade: (n) Accolade means "great praise, enthusiastic approval."
acerbic: (adj) Acerbic describes the scowl on the face of a sourpuss or curmudgeon.
acme: (n) The acme of anything is its summit, its utmost limit. Akme is classical Greek for "highest point."
acolyte: (n) originally, an acolyte was a priest's attendant at church, an altar boy. It has come to mean any "follower" or "attendant" of an important personage.
acquiesce: (vb) Usually followed by the preposition 'in', it means to "agree with," "consent to," "comply with."
acrimonious: (adj) Acrimonious remarks are bitter and cutting.
acronym: (n) An acronym is a word formed from the initial letters of a group of words, like radar (ratio detecting and ranging).
adage: (n) an adage is a proverb, or a traditional saying.
admonitory: (adj) anything that is admonitory provides a warning.
adroit: (adj) An adroit person is skillful, resourceful, quick to seize upon the right move in a situation, especially a tricky one.
adulation: (n) Anyone who feels adulation is likely to display fawning adoration or devotion.
adversity: (n) Adversity is a condition marked by back luck, troubles, woes, hard times.
aegis: (n) The Aegis in Greek mythology was a shield of Zeus and a symbol of protection. Thus the word came into common use meaning "sponsorship" or "patronage."
affable: (adj) We are all fond of friends who are affable; they're pleasant, friendly, and easy to talk to.
aficionado: (n) An aficionado is a devotee, an ardent follower, a fan. A person who never misses a single game of the home team is an aficionado.
affinity: (n) When we have an affinity for someone or something, we experience a natural liking and feel an attraction.
aggrandize: (vb) When you aggrandize something, you magnify it, inflate it, or increase it. Aggrandize sometimes takes on a meaning of making, or trying to make, people or things greater than they are.
alacrity: (n) Anything done with alacrity is done with cheerful or eager readiness, the opposite of reluctance.
allay: (vb) To allay something is to calm or quiet it, or relieve it, depending on the context.
allegory: (n) An allegory is a symbolic narrative; it is a late that is not to be taken literally, but is told to present a moral lesson or universal truth.
alleviate: (vb) Anything that alleviates relieves or lessens. Aspirin alleviates a fever.
Alliteration: (n) The repetition of a sound or letter in two or more words in a sequence is an alliteration. Examples- sing a song of sixpence
amanuensis: (n) Secretary; one who takes dictation or copies (in these days, types) a manuscript.
ambience: (n) Ambience is the mood, character, or atmosphere of an environment; the quality of the surrounding or milieu.
ambiguous: (adj) Anything ambiguous is capable of more than one meaning and, therefore, unclear.
ambivalent: (adj) When a person is ambivalent about something, he is indecisive, unable to make up his mind, wavering between two courses of action or opposing opinions at one and the same time, both yes and no.
ambulatory: (adj) One who is ambulatory is able to walk, as opposed to being bedridden. It is a term heard often in hospitals.
ameliorate: (vb) When you ameliorate something, you improve it or make it better.
amenable: (adj) An amenable person is agreeable, willing to be persuaded, to listen to reason, and to follow advice.
amenity: (n) Amenity, generally speaking, connotes pleasantness and agreeableness. 
amorous: (adj) A word with many facets- affectionate; having a tendency to love; obsessed by sexuality; smitten; showing love.
amorphous: (adj) This word describes anything without definite shape or form; formless.
anachronism: (n) This term applies to any person, institution, custom, concept, etc., that belongs to another age.
anagram: (n) An anagram is a word formed from a rearrangement of the letters in another word. Evil is an anagram of vile.
analogy: (n) This word is used to describe a resemblance based on the similarity between certain figures of two things, like the human heart and a mechanical pump.
anathema: (n) Anathema is commonly used to describe a detestable thing or person.
ancillary: (adj) This word means the same thing as "auxiliary" and describes anything that serves as an accessory.
animus: (n) When a person experiences animus, he is filled with hostility and antagonism. The use of animus implies, generally, that the ill will, though unexpressed, is deep-seated.
annals: (n, pl) Annals are historical records.
anomaly: (n) An anomaly is a deviation from the general rule or type; anything out of keeping with accepted ideas of how thing should be.
antecedents: (n, pl) This word can bean both "ancestors" and "events of one's earlier life."
anthropology: (n) Anthropology is the study of mankind, its origins, development, customs, and racial characteristics.
anthropomorphic: (adj) Any act or statement that ascribes human characteristics to gods, animals, and objects is anthropomorphic.
antic: (n, adj) This word describes odd or eccentric behavior, amusing gestures, pranks, and capers. It is most often found in the plural.
antipathy: (n) An antipathy fills us with aversion and a strong dislike.
antiquity: (n) This word has a number of uses. It can mean "ancient times;" it can denote the quality of ancientness; in the plural it describes relics of ancient times.
antithesis: (n) The antithesis of anything is its direct opposite. 
aphorism: (n) An aphorism is a concise statement of a general truth. Aphorisms are also known by such names as maxims, proverbs, and old saws.
aplomb: (n) Aplomb is self-assurance, poise, imperturbability. A person with aplomb is not fazed or disconcerted under the most trying circumstances.
apocalypse: (n) A dire word, describing disaster, cataclysm, the end of the world.
apocryphal: (adj) This word is used to describe things, usually stories or reports, of questionable authenticity.
apogee: (n) In astronomy, the apogee is the point in the orbit of any planet, satellite, the moon, etc. when it is furthers from earth. The perigee is the nearest point.Apogee is used frequently to mean the "high point" of anything, and in that sense it can mean "climax" or "summit."
apostate: (n) An apostate is a person who renounces his faith, party, etc., a renegade or defector.
apotheosis: (n) This word, in its literal use, describes deification, e.e., the raising of a person to divine rank. 
appellation: (n) An appellation is a name or designation applied to somebody or something.
apposite: (adj) This is a term applied to something that is to the point, or well put. An apposite answer or remark is exactly right, on the nose.
apprehend: (vb) The common use of this word is as a somewhat more formal substitute for catch or arrest, in the sense of "take into custody." It has two subsidiary meanings- "to grasp the meaning of (something)", and "to worry about, expect with fear and anxiety, dread."
appropriate: (adj, vb) As an adjective, appropriate describes anything suitable for a particular purpose or occasion. The verb is very different- to appropriate something can mean merely to "set it aside" for a specific purpose, or it can be a polite word for "steal." 
apt: (adj) Apt has several meanings. It has the sense "inclined." It can also mean "likely." The word can also describe the quality of being able to acquire knowledge quickly. Finally, apt can be used in the sense of "suitable," fit for a particular need, purpose, or occasion.
arbiter: (n) Arbiter describes a final authority, one with the absolute power to decide. 
arcane: (adj) This word characterizes something secret or obscure, with a hint of mystery.
arch: (adj) This word can be used in several ways- it can describe people who are mischievous or roguish. Arch is also used in the sense of "outstanding," connected to the word it modifies (arch-villian). It can be used as an intensive prefix, in the sense of "chief" or "principal" (archbishop). 
arduous: (adj) It can be used in a number of ways- It can mean "laborious." It can also mean "strenuous." It can also characterize something hard to bear (arduous winter). 
argot: (n) Argot is jargon, the idiom of a particular class or group. The term applies particularly to the underworld- the argot of thieves, etc. 
arid: (adj) The literal meaning is "extremely dry." Used figuratively, arid means "dull and uninteresting." 
Armageddon: (n) Armageddon is the biblical scene of the final battle between the forces of good and the forces of evil at the end of the world. The word is used figuratively to characterize any decisive, final conflict. 
arrant: (adj) This word is used to intensify a quality of a person or thing, in the sense of "out-and-out" or "downright." 
arrogate: (vb) To arrogate something is to claim it as one's own without right.
arsenal: (n) This word, which in its literal sense denotes a place for the storage of arms and ammunition, is used figuratively to describe a supply or collection or repertory of anything.
artful: (adj) An artful person is crafty, deceitful, and cunning, the exact opposite of artless. Do not misuse artful in the sense of "artistic."
artless: (adj) An artless person is free from deceit and guile; without craftiness or cunning. 
ascetic: (n, adj) An ascetic is a self-denying person. As an adjective it means "self-denying," rigorously refraining-from the ordinary pleasures of life.
asperity: (n) Asperity is harshness and acrimony. The harshness is of a kind expressed by tone or manner. 
aspersion: (n) This word is usually found in the plural, meaning "damaging assertions" and "slandering vilification."
assiduous: (adj) This word, denoting perseverance and diligence, can apply to both people and such things as effort, attention, or devotion.
assuage: (vb) To assuage is to soothe and relieve. Thoughtful cards of sympathy can help to assuage grief.
atavistic: (adj) Anything atavistic exhibits the characteristics of one's forebears or of a primitive culture. It comes from the noun atavism. 
atrophy: (n, vb) Atrophy is wasting away or degeneration. Muscles suffer atrophy through lack of use or exercise.
attenuate: (vb) To attenuate something is to weaken it, to thin it out and reduce it in intensity or value. Inflation has drastically attenuated our purchasing power.
augment: (vb) To augment is to increase, fill out. People in the service industry can augment their salary with tips.
augur: (vb) To augur is to foreshadow. An enthusiastic reaction from a first-night audience augurs a long run.
auspicious: (adj) Anything auspicious is favorable and promising. The augurs of ancient Rome were officials who interpreted omens such as the flight and feeding of birds.
autonomous: (adj) An independent, self-governing, self-regulating body is said to be autonomous.
avuncular: (adj) One who acts like an affectionate uncle is said to be avuncular.
awry: (adj, adv) When something is awry, it is amiss; it has gone haywire.
axiom: (n) An axiom is a self-evident truth, a truism, a general principle that is universally acknowledged and needs no proof.
badinage: (n) Badinage is banter, playful repartee. Badinage with an attractive member of the opposite sex can lead to more serious activities. 
bailiwick: (n) [BAY-luh-wik] One's bailiwick is one's field of skill, one's own particular area of expertise. Knowledge of nuclear physics is far outside most people's bailiwick. 
baleful: (adj) Anything baleful is threatening or destructive.
banal: (adj) This word describes anything commonplace, hackneyed, or uninspired.
bastion: (n) A bastion is a stronghold or bulwark. Literally, it describes a projecting section of a fort, but it is used figuratively to denote any stronghold, especially in the moral or abstract sense. 
bathos: (n) [BAY-thohs] Bathos is sentimentality, as opposed to true sentiment, a ludicrous, anticlimactic drop from the lofty to the common place. It is an effect of anticlimax created by an unintentional lapse in mood from the sublime to the trivial and ridiculous.
behemoth: (n) [bih-HEE-mith] A behemoth is a monster, a gigantic creature.
beleaguer: (vb) To beleaguer is to besiege, harass, or beset. Literally it means "to surround (a fortified town, e.g.) with military forces."
bellicose: (adj) This word describes hostility and belligerence, the attitude of one eager to do battle. 
belligerent: (n, adj) As a noun, a belligerent is a nation at war. As an adjective belligerent means "hostile, bellicose."
bemused: (adj) A person bemused is puzzled, muddles, preoccupied. More commonly, it is a convenient way of describing a state of lingering puzzlement.
bestow: (vb) To bestow something is to present or confer it. Bestow is commonly followed by on or upon.
bibliophile: (n) A bibliophile is a book-lover, a collector of books. Bibliophiles spend enormous amounts of money collecting first editions.
bibulous: (adj) Bibulous people are those addicted to drink. 
blandishment: (n) This word describes enticing action or speech and is usually used in the plural- In old-fashioned movies, strong men crumpled before the blandishments of vamps and sirens.
blatant: (adj) Anything blatant is completely obvious. Erroneous conclusions are sometimes reached on the basis of blatant errors. Blatant often indicates an attitude of brazen shamelessness.
bovine: (adj) Literally, this word means "of the ox family," but it is most commonly used figuratively to mean "dull, stolid, listless, sluggish."
bravado: (n) A swaggering show of bold courage is called bravado. Bullies are much given to bravado.
brickbat: (n) A brickbat is a cutting remark, an unkind criticism. The word means literally "a piece of broken brick," thrown as a missile, but it is most commonly used informally and figuratively to describe a caustic comment.
bromide: (n) Literally, a bromide is a chemical compound involving bromine used as a sedative. In a common figurative use it denotes a platitude, a commonplace, a hackneyed remark, a trite generalization, likewise used as a sedative to soothe someone's nerves.
brook: (vb) To brook something is to tolerate it, to put up with it. For some reason, this word is almost always used in the negative. It is not applied to people, but rather to their acts, conduct, or attitudes, and to situations. 
brouhaha: (n) This lively word describes a commotion, uproar, ado. 
brusque: (adj) A manner that is brusque is curt, abrupt, and somewhat harsh. People sometimes act brusquely in order to present a businesslike image. Brusque manners can sometimes offend. 
bucolic: (adj) Rustic. 
burgeon: (vb) Burgeoning is literally the budding and sprouting of plants. The verb has somehow acquired the implication of "developing suddenly," almost before your eyes. 
cabal: (n) A cabal is a group of plotters, but can also describe the group's intrigues and plots. In a less sinister sense it can mean simply a "clique" or "coterie." Its original use suggests a small group of secret plotters working against the government or authority. 
cachet: (n) [kuh-SHAY] Cachet can be used in a number of ways. It can denote a stamp of approval from one in a high position. The word can be applied to a feature that imparts prestige. Cachet can mean "prestige" itself. The word was taken over intact from the French, where it means "seal" or "stamp."
cacophony: (n) [KAH-KOFF-uh-nee] Cacophony is strident, discordant noise.
cadaverous: (adj) Anyone cadaverous looks haggard and ghastly. The word implies pallor, gauntness, and emaciation. People on hunger strikes look cadaverous. 
cadge: (vb) [KADJ] People who cadge something get it by begging, with the emphasis on imposing on the other fellow's good nature. Some people cadge by going through the motions of borrowing with no intention of repaying.
cajole: (vb) To cajole is to wheedle, to coax by promises and flattery. One can cajole something out of somebody or cajole somebody into something. Little boys are good at cajoling autographs of famous athletes. 
callow: (adj) Callow people are immature, or "green." 
calumny: (n) Calumny is slander, smear; the malicious making of false statements in order to damage a reputation. The legal profession calls calumny "libel" when it is written, and "slander" or "defamation" when it is spoken.
canard: (n) [kuh-nard] A canard is a hoax or false rumour. Sensational journalism thrives on canards. 
candor: (n) [kan-dur] Candor is the label of a fine quality in people- frankness, openness, sincerity. Candor may displease in certain circumstances, but is is a quality people respect.
canon: (n) [kan-in] A canon is a rule or general principle. Life in civilized society should be regulated by canons of taste and discretion. 
cant: (n) [kant] Cant has a number of meanings. It can be used to describe insincere talk, especially statements of high ideals. The word also serves to denote the special argot or jargon of a particular group, class, or profession. Finally, the word can be applied to underworld jargon.
cantankerous: (adj) [kan-tangk-ur-us] Stay away from cantankerous people- they're bad-tempered, ill-humored, irritable, quarrelsome, grouchy, and generally difficult to deal with and exasperating.
capitulate: (vb) To capitulate is to surrender. 
capricious: (adj) The capricious person is impulsive and tends to be erratic. That which is capricious is unpredictable and changes on a whim. Even on a sunny day, capricious winds are a threat to sailing.
captious: (adj) Captious people are faultfinding and nit-picking. Captious questions from the audience can unsettle even experienced speakers. 
carnal: (adj) This word means "sensual," bodily as opposed to spiritual. Carnal abuse (sexual tampering with a child) and carnal knowledge (sexual intercourse) are terms in criminal law.
carnivorous: (adj) Carnivorous means "meat-eating." 
carp: (vb) One who carps keeps complaining, finding fault, nit-picking. Constructive criticism is welcome; continual carping isn't. Carping is synonymous with caviling and suggests unreasonable and ill-natured complaining and fussing about minor matters.
carrion: (n) This unpleasant word describes dead, decaying flesh, unfit for human consumption. Carrion is sometimes used as an adjective, describing either the flesh itself or animals that feed on carrion.
castigate: (vb) When you castigate someone, you punish him severely. The implication is that the punishment is intended to improve or correct the one unpunished. 
casuistry: (n) [kaj-oo-ihs-tree] This word describes dishonest, specious reasoning. Today it is often used to describe the fallacious application of general principles to particular situations.
cataclysm: (n) [kat-uh-kliz'm] A cataclysm is a violent upheaval. In geological terminology, a cataclysm is a natural disaster that causes changes in the earth's surface.
catharsis: (n) [kuh-thar-sis] Catharsis is relief from pent-up emotion. Catharsis leaves one feeling empty and sad, but spiritually renewed. 
catholic: (adj) [kath-uh-lik] This word, with a lower-case c, applies to people (or their views or tastes) who (or which) are broad-minded and have universal sympathies and appreciation-- the very opposite of "narrow" in its figurative sense.
caveat: (n) [kay-vee-aht] This word, which is Latin for "Let him beware!," is used as a noun meaning "warning." 
cavil: (vb) [kav-ul] To cavil is to quibble, to raise nit-picking, picayune objections; to find fault with, in an irritating manner. 
celibacy: (n) [sel-uh-bih-see] Celibacy is bachelorhood, the unmarried state; but it can also apply to abstention from sex, whether one is married or not. 
champion: (vb) [cham-pee-un] When you champion a person or a cause, you are supporting, defending, arguing in favor of him or it. 
charlatan: (n) [shar-luh-tin] A charlatan is a quick, anyone who claims more skill than he possesses. 
chary: (adj) [chair-ee] This word has two distinct meanings. It can mean "cautious" or "wary." It can also mean "sparing." 
chasm: (n) [kaz-um] A chasm is a deep gap, ravine, or gorge. Figuratively, the word is used to denote a deep difference in opinion or attitude. 
chicanery: (n) [shih-kay-nuh-ree] This is a useful word to describe trickery, deception by sophistry, subterfuge, and artful quibbling to obtain an advantage. Chicanery is the opposite of straightforwardness. Chicanery is used to sow seeds of doubt in what would otherwise be a clear-cut situation. 
chide: (vb) [chyd] To chide someone is to scold him, with the implication that the scolding is on the mild side. 
chimera: (n) [ky-meer-uh] A chimera is a figment of the imagination, an illusion. The Chimera of mythology was a fire-breathing monster, part lion, goat, and serpent. 
churlish: (adj) [chur-lish] A churlish person is a boor. Churl (in the medieval English social order, the lowest caste of freeman) came to mean "peasant" or "rustic," and was then applied to any boorish person.
cipher: (n) [sy-fer] Three meanings- cipher is synonymous with "zero" in numerical parlance; cipher also came to signify a person with a minimum of personality, a nonentity; cipher can also be a synonym for "code," a secret method of communication in writing or otherwise. 
circuitous: (adj) [sur-kyoo-ih-tis] Anything circuitous is roundabout, indirect. 
circumlocution: (n) [sur-kum-low-kyoo-shin] A circumlocution is a roundabout way of phrasing something, the use of more words to express a thought or describe something than are necessary. 
circumspect: (adj) [sur-kum-spekt] A circumspect person is watchful, cautious, looks out for pitfalls, looks before he leaps. 
clamorous: (adj) [klam-uh-rus] When people are clamorous, they are vociferous and demanding.
clandestine: (adj) [klan-des-tin] Clandestine is the equivalent of "undercover." Clandestine describes acts, usually meetings, arranged very carefully and executed with the utmost secrecy. 
claptrap: (n) [klap-trap] This is a word to describe pretentious nonsense, primarily to win praise. Claptrap is anything contrived to impress, but without substance.
cleave: (vb) [kleev] This word has two distinct (and roughly opposite) meanings. It can mean "to split," and it can mean "to cling." For the past tense, clove or cleft is now more common. 
clemency: (n) [klem-in-see] This noun, which denotes mercifulness and leniency, is based upon the adjective clement, a word not in as common use as its opposite inclement. 
cloy: (vb) [kloy] When people or things cloy, they become distasteful through excess. Something originally pleasant, like sweetness or disposition or rich food, cloys when it is piled on, served up in overabundance. Continual adoration finally cloys. Cloying is the adjective, meaning "sickeningly sweet." 
cogent: (adj) [koh-jint] What is cogent is convincing. The word is usually associated with reason or argument. 
cognizant: (n) [kog-nih-zint] To be cognizant of something is to be aware of it. It sometimes takes people too long to become cognizant of the perilousness of their situation.
collation: (n) [kuh-lay-shin] This word has several meanings not in current use- one of them is the verification of the numbering of pages of a book. In ordinary use it means "light meal."
colloquy: (n) [kol-uh-kwee] Colloquy is conversation or dialogue. The word sometimes implies a degree of formality in the conversational exchange. 
compendium: (n) [kum-pen-dee-um] This word denotes a brief, concise treatise on a subject; a summary. 
complacent: (adj) [kum-play-sint] complacent people are self-satisfied and quite pleased with themselves. Do not confuse this word with complaisant.
complaisant: (adj) [kum-play-zint] A complaisant person is agreeable and obliging. A complaisant salesperson is a big help. Do not confuse this word with complacent. 
compliant: (adj) [kum-ply-int] A compliant person is submissive and yielding. It is easy to do business with a person of compliant nature. 
concomitant: (n, adj) [kon-kom-ih-tint] A concomitant is something that accompanies another thing or an event. As an adjective concomitant means "accompanying" or "concurrent."
concrete: (adj) [kon-kreet] Things are concrete when they are real, actual (as opposed to abstract); specific, particular (as opposed to general). 
conduit: (n) [kon-dwit] It is defined in most dictionaries as a channel, whether in the form of a pipe or tube or a natural passage, for the conveyance of liquids, or a protective pipe or tube covering electrical wiring. 
congenital: (adj) [kun-jen-ih-tul] This word has two related, but distinct, meanings. It can describe something existing at birth. Another thing is "by nature"- Some people don't have the slightest idea- they're congenital idiots!
consensus: (n) [kun-sen-sis] A consensus is a general agreement or majority view. The word alone expresses the concept of majority opinion, so that it is redundant to use the expression consensus of opinion, which one comes across too often. 
consortium: (n) [kun-sor-tee-um] This is the term for an association, particularly of banks or companies, blending together to combine their capital in an enterprise, often for the purpose of gaining control of an industry. 
consummate: (vb, adj) [kon-suh-mate, kuhn-sum-it] To consummate something is to accomplish it, to bring it to completion. As an adjective, with the second pronunciation accent on second syllable, consummate means complete, top, superb. 
contentious: (adj) [kun-ten-shus] A contentious person is quarrelsome; a contentious issue is a controversial one. 
context: (n) [kon-text] This word has two distinct uses. It can be applied to that part of a statement which affects the meaning of the rest of the statement. Context can also refer to the circumstances in which an event occurs. 
contiguous: (adj) [kun-tig-yoo-us] Contiguous means "touching," in the sense of "bordering upon," and is followed by the preposition to. Sometimes contiguous is used in the sense of "nearby." 
contretemps: (n) [kon-truh-tahn] A contretemps is an unfortunate occurrence, a mischance that results in discomfort, especially embarrassment. 
contrite: (adj) [kun-tryt] To be contrite is to repent, to be penitent, to suffer from a sense of guilt. 
contumacious: (adj) [kon-tyoo-may-shus] To be contumacious is to be stubbornly disobedient. It is difficult to deal with a contumacious subordinate. 
conundrum: (n) [kuh-num-druhm] A conundrum is a puzzle or riddle. Figuratively, the word is used to characterize a problem hard to solve.
co-opt: (vb) [koh-opt] This word is most commonly used in the sense of "preempt." In a slightly stronger sense, co-opt can be used to mean "commandeer." 
copious: (adj) [koh-pee-us] Anything copious is plentiful, abundant. Copious examples help to clarify the meaning of a word. The word also describes things that produce a plentiful yield.
corollary: (n) [kor-uh-lair-ee] A corollary is a natural consequence or the inevitable result of something. Jealousy has been described as a "normal corollary of love." 
corporeal: (adj) [kor-por-ee-ul] Anything corporeal is physical, material, as opposed to spiritual. 
correlate: (vb) [kor-uh-layt] To correlate things is to connect them in a systematic relationship. The word can also be used to describe the bringing together of various activities and organizing them for the most effective action. 
coruscate: (vb) [kor-uh-skayt] To coruscate is to sparkle, either physically or abstractly. 
cosset: (vb) [kos-it] When you cosset someone you are pampering or coddling him. People who are cosseted from birth often turn out to be self-centered. 
coterie: (n) [koh-tuh-ree] A coterie is a clique, a select group, intimate and exclusive and united by a common interest or purpose. 
craven: (adj) [kray-vin] Craven is a highly uncomplimentary term for "cowardly," "faint-hearted" to a contemptible degree, "cringing." 
craw: (n) [kraw] This term applies to a bird's crop or any animal's stomach, but it is used frequently and figuratively in the expression stick in one's craw, meaning "be intolerable." 
credible: (adj) [kred-uh-bul] What is credible is believable, convincing. The word can be applied to a report or statement or to the person making it. 
crestfallen: (adj) [krest-fall-in] When you are crestfallen, you are disappointed and dejected. Think of the poor struggling author, crestfallen as he accumulates rejection slips.
culpable: (adj) [kulp-uh-bul] Culpable behavior is blameworthy. Many avoidable accidents are the result of culpable disregard for hazardous road conditions. 
curmudgeon: (n) [kur-muj-ihn] This term can be applied to anyone quick to anger, to complain, to bark. Curmudgeons have the opposite of sunny dispositions, and are hard to get along with.
cursory: (adj) [kur-sehr-ree] A cursory look or inspection is a hasty, superficial one, done without attention to details, the opposite of thorough. 
curt: (adj) [kurt] To be curt is to be rudely abrupt. 
cynosure: (n) [sy-nuh-shur, not sy-noh-zhur] This word describes the center of attraction, and is usually found in the expression "cynosure of all eyes."
dalliance: (n) [dal-ee-ins] To engage in dalliance is to dawdle. Dalliance sometimes means "time-wasting," but it's more common use is the phrase amorous dalliance (flirtation), and dalliance all by itself has that implication. The verb is to dally with the same implications.
daub: (vb) [dawb] To daub is to smear, or to coat (something) with soft adhesive matter. Lips should never be carelessly daubed with lipstick. 
dauntless: (adj) [dawnt-lis] Dauntless people are fearless. 
dearth: (n) [durth] Dearth is scarcity. It is a negative word and describes the lack of something. 
debacle: (n) [dih-bahk-ul not duh-bak-ul] Debacle is a sudden collapse, a disastrous breakdown. 
debase: (vb) [duh-base] To debase is to lower (someone or something) in quality, rank, worth, etc. Inflation has debased the value of the dollar. 
debilitate: (vb) [dih-bil-uh-tayt] To debilitate is to weaken, whether the object is a person or thing. Debility is the state of being weak. 
debunk: (vb) [dee-bungk] When you debunk something (usually a statement or claim) you show it up as false or exaggerated and strip it of its pretensions. 
decimate: (vb) [des-ih-mayt] To decimate is to destroy a large proportion or number (of a group). 
declasse: (adj) [day-kluh-say] Anyone or anything declasse is of inferior class or quality. Loud clothes and rough manners stamp people as definitely declasse. 
decorous: (adj) [dek-uh-ruhs] One who is decorous or behaves in a decorous manner can be said to be well-mannered, seemly, observant of the properties. The noun is "decorum," meaning dignity of behavior, observance of the proprieties." 
decry: (vb) [dih-kry] When you decry something you disparage it, call attention to its defects. Do not confuse decry with descry, which means "to discern, catch sight of." 
deduce: (vb) [dih-doos] To deduce something is to draw a conclusion from given data. 
deem: (vb) [deem] What is deemed is believed, judged, considered. 
deferential: (adj) [def-uh-ren-shul] To be deferential is to act respectfully. This meaning is derived from one of the meanings of the verb to defer, which signifies yielding in matters of judgement or opinion. 
definitive: (adj) [duh-fin-uh-tiv] Anything definitive is authoritative, the last word on the subject. 
delectation: (n) [deh-lek-tay-shin] Delectation is delight and enjoyment. 
deleterious: (n) [del-uh-teer-ee-us] What is deleterious is harmful, injurious. By itself, it commonly means "injurious to health." In context, the injuriousness implied is of a more general nature. 
demonic: (adj) [dee-mon-ik] This word is used to describe anything that is like a demon, or as though possessed or activated by a demon. 
denigrate: (vb) [den-uh-grayt] Anyone or anything denigrated is defamed; his or its reputation is blackened. 
denizen: (n) [den-uh-zin] Denizens are inhabitants, residents.  
deprecate: (vb) [dep-ruh-kayt] To deprecate is to express disapproval, to belittle. Philistines deprecate the value of a classical education. Deprecate is milder than depreciate. Do not confuse with depredate (plunder).
deracinate: (vb) [dee-ras-ih-nayt] To deracinate is to uproot. This word can be used both literally and figuratively. 
derelict: (n, adj) [derr-uh-likt] This word can be used as a noun or adjective and has at least two meanings in each. As an adjective, it can mean "abandoned." Derelict has another entirely different meaning as an adjective- "neglectful of duty." As a noun, it implies something abandoned by its owner. In a separate sense, it means "vagrant" or "bum." Dereliction is deliberate failure to perform one's assigned task, and is found in the expression dereliction of duty. 
deride: (vb) [dee-ryd] To deride is to scoff at or mock someone or something. When you deride someone, you laugh at him, ridicule him. 
derogatory: (adj) [dee-rog-uh-tor-ee] Anything derogatory is disparaging and belittling. Derogatory remarks can damage a reputation. 
descry: (vb) [dih-skry] When you descry something, you make it out, catch sight of it. The implication is that the thing descried is far away. Do not confuse descry with decry. 
desecrate: (vb) [des-uh-krayt] To desecrate something is to treat it irreverently, to profane and defile it. This is the opposite of consecrate. 
desiccate: (vb) [des-ih-kayt] When something is desiccated, it is dried up. Desiccated is also used figuratively to mean "dried up" in the sense of "dull, listless." 
desuetude: (n) [des-wih-tood] Desuetude is disuse; the state of no longer being used. People in retirement all too often allow their once fertile brains to grow into desuetude. 
desultory: (adj) [des-ul-tor-ee] This word describes anything fitful and lacking in steadiness. People get nowhere though occasional and desultory attempts to find a job. 
detrimental: (adj) [deh-truh-ment-ul] Anything detrimental is harmful, injurious. 
detritus: (n) [dih-tryt-us] Detritus is debris, waste matter. In deep forests, the ground is covered with the detritus of fallen leaves and branches. 
dexterous, dextrous: (adj) [dek-stuh-rus, dek-strus] A dexterous person is skillful and clever. Its specific application is to manual skills, but it is used in a more general way to describe any form of skill or adroitness. 
diaphanous: (adj) [dy-ahf-uh-nus] What is diaphanous is sheer, almost transparent. Women can be seductive in diaphanous gowns. 
diatribe: (n) [dy-uh-tryb] A diatribe is a bitter attack in words. Legal arguments can be more effective with subtlety than with diatribes. 
dichotomy: (n) [dy-kot-uh-mee] Dichotomy is a division into two parts, generally for the purpose of differentiation between two contrasting concepts, as in the dichotomy between theory and practice. 
didactic: (adj) [dy-dak-tik] Didactic activity is instructive, intended to teach. Didactic writing may help your education but usually doesn't lift your emotions.
diffident: (adj) [diff-uh-dint] A diffident person is shy and lacking in self-confidence. Diffident is the opposite of brash. Diffidence is what makes it so difficult for young men to start a conversation with attractive young women they'd love to get to know. 
digress: (vb) [dy-gres] To digress is to depart temporarily from the main topic. Some people digress so often that their audience loses sight of the main topic. 
dilettante: (n) [dil-uh-tant-ee]  This word describes a dabbler, one who takes up an activity, particularly in the arts, for his own amusement rather than seriously, and goes into it in a rather superficial way. Taken over intact from the Italian. 
diminution: (n) [dim-uh-nyoo-shin] Diminution is a lessening, a decrease. Old age causes a gradual diminution of the hearing faculty. 
disaffection: (n) [dis-uh-fek-shin] Disaffection is disloyalty, with the implication that loyalty once felt no longer exists. People who experience disaffection are said to be disaffected. The unreasonable demands of a foremen often result in disaffection among the rank and file. 
disconsolate: (adj) [dis-kon-suh-lit] A person who is disconsolate is hopelessly unhappy. Bereavement leaves some people disconsolate no matter how hard friends try to cheer them up.
discursive: (adj) [dih-skur-siv] Anything discursive rambles from subject to subject. Discursion is a little-used noun. Some treatises are so discursive that it is hard to keep the main topic in mind. 
disdain: (vb) [dis-dayn] To disdain something is to scorn and despise it, to look upon it with contempt or to think it beneath one's dignity. Gourmets disdain the products of the fast-food chains. 
disingenuous: (adj) [dis-in-jen-yoo-us] A disingenuous person or act is an insincere one. A disingenuous person tries to appear ingenuous, i.e., to act innocent and sincere in order to achieve an ulterior end. 
disparate: (adj) [dis-per-it] What is disparate is distinctly different in kind. Einstein engaged in activities as disparate as formulating the Theory of Relativity and playing the fiddle. 
dissemble: (vb) [dih-sem-bul] To dissemble is to give a false appearance. It can take an object- Some people work long hours to make a good impression and dissemble their lack of experience. By itself the word is synonymous with dissimulate, in the sense of "acting hypocritically." 
dissertation: (n) [dis-ur-tay-shun] A dissertation is a formal essay or discourse, especially a treatise required for the degree of Ph.D. The word is at times used ironically, to characterize a long-winded treatment of a subject. 
dissimulate: (vb) [dih-sim-yuh-layt] When you dissimulate something you disguise it, hide it under a false exterior. Used by itself (without an object), to dissimulate is to conceal one's thoughts, feelings, motives, generally through the use of hypocritical words or acts. 
dissolute: (adj) [dis-uh-loot] A dissolute person has no morals and is shamelessly uninhibited by any rules of conduct. The word can also mean "dissipated," to describe those who indulge in unbridled pleasure without moral restraint. 
distraught: (adj) [dih-strawt] When you are distraught you are greatly upset, deeply troubled. People become distraught by bereavement, financial disaster, and other calamities. 
doff: (vb) [dahf] When you doff your hat or any other article of clothing, you take it off. Doff is a contraction of do off, and is a rather formal and elegant word to describe the removal of clothing. Doff can be used to mean "lay aside, get rid of," referring to things other than apparel. This is a fairly rare usage. 
dogged: (adj) [dog-id] Dogged means "persistent," "determined," "stubbornly tenacious." People try to attain success through dogged efforts. People, as well as efforts or convictions, can be described as dogged. 
doggerel: (n) [dah-guh-rul] This is the word to describe trivial, poor verse. I am unclear as to what makes verse trivial or poor.
dogmatic: (adj) [dahg-mat-ik] Dogmatic is opinionated and describes the asserting of opinions in an arrogant manner with an air of authority. A dogmatic person expresses an opinion as though it were a proven and universally accepted fact, permitting of no possible contrary belief. 
doleful: (adj) [dohl-ful] Anything doleful is mournful and sorrowful. Pessimists always see the doleful side of any situation.
dolt: (n) [dohlt] A dolt is a blockhead or nitwit. Doltish means "stupid." 
don: (vb) [dahn] To don an article of clothing is to put it on. Just as doff is a contraction of do off, don is a contraction of do on. 
dormant: (adj) [dohr-mint] Anything dormant is temporarily inactive, in abeyance. Dormant is a form of the French verb dormir (to sleep), and means, literally, sleeping.
dossier: (n) [dahs-ee-ay] A dossier is a record; literally, an accumulation of documents containing data relating to someone or something, but used loosely to mean "record," in the sense of background information. 
doughty: (adj) [dow-tee] A doughty person is stout-hearted, resolute, unafraid. 
dour: (adj) [doo'r] A dour person looks severe and stern. The words can take on the shades of "harsh, sullen, forbidding." Dour manners inhibit attempts to establish friendly relations. The Puritans are usually depicted as a dour lot.
doyen: (n) [doy-ehn] The doyen is the senior member (in the sense of leading representative) or dean of a group. Doyen is often interchangeable with dean. Doyen can also apply to an especially skilled or knowledgeable person who is outstanding in his field. 
draconian: (adj) [druh-koe-nee-in] This word expresses the concept of extreme harshness or severity and is most often found in the term draconian measures, describing harsh laws or procedures, the kind beloved of dictators. The word is sometimes capitalized, as alluding to Draco, and is not to be confused with draconic which means "dragon-like." 
droll: (adj) [drole] Droll people and things are oddly amusing. Droll people make you laugh by whimsical, eccentric conduct or words. 
dudgeon: (n) [duj-in] Dudgeon is resentment and indignation, and is practically always found in the expression in high dudgeon, meaning "very resentful and full of indignation." Its most common use is to describe an indignant exit.
duplicity: (n) [doo-plis-ih-tee] This word expresses deceitfulness, double-dealing, bad faith. It describes the acts of one who pretends to feel one way and acts the opposite way, and cheats. Duplicity always involves betrayal. 
ebullient: (adj) [ih-bul-yint] An ebullient person is high-spirited, exuberant. 
eclectic: (adj) [ek-lehk-tik] Anything or anyone eclectic is selective, choosing from various sources. An eclectic person will choose the best from various sources in order to form his tastes or arrive at his opinions.
edify: (vb) [ed-uh-fy] Edify has two distinct senses- to "instruct," and to "uplift." Edifying as an adjective reflects the uplifting aspect. Edification, the noun, reflects the instructing or enlightening aspect.
effectuate: (vb) [ih-fek-choo-ayt] To effectuate something is to bring it about, make it happen, bring it to pass. Our country must exert its best efforts to effectuate a resolution of the complicated question of Palestinian autonomy. 
efficacious: (adj) [ef-uh-kay-shus] What is efficacious is productive of the desired result. The word is not always interchangeable with effective, and never with effectual or efficient. Efficacious is used where a specific result is attained. 
effective: (adj) [ih-fek-tiv] There are a number of uses- 1. In situations where something is helpful in producing an effect; 2. In situations where something goes into effect; 3. Where something is actual (as opposed to apparent); 4. When something or somebody is impressive or striking.
efflorescence: (n) [ef-luh-res-incse] An efflorescence is a flowering or blossoming, but is more often used figuratively. Beethoven's later works were the efflorescence of his art. 
effrontery: (n) [ih-frun-tuh-ree] This word describes impudent boldness, shameless audacity. There are budding playwrights who, after one mind success, have the effrontery to couple themselves with William Shakespeare.
effulgent: (adj) [ih-ful-jint] Something effulgent is that which shines brightly; radiant. It can be used figuratively. The effulgent beauty of the Mona Lisa makes the other paintings near it seem drab by comparison.
egregious: (adj) [ih-gree-jus] This is an intensely pejorative adjective, applied to things that are exceptionally, glaringly bad. As things turned out, our involvement in Vietnam was an egregious mistake.
egress: (n) [ee-gres] An egress is an exit, and like exit, covers both the act and the means of going out of a place, i.e., the exit that is made or the exit through which it is made. 
elegy: (n) [el-uh-jee] An elegy is a mournful poem. The term can also apply to a musical composition in a melancholy vein. The adjective is elegiac. 
elicit: (vb) [ih-lis-it] To elicit something is to draw it out, in the way in which persistent questioning by the police results in a disclosure. A sad face often elicits compassion. 
elide: (vb) [ih-lyd] To elide is to omit, and the word is most often applied to the omission of one or more letters, whether in pronunciation or in writing, as in can't for cannot,  you're for you are, etc for et cetera, etc. The noun for the phenomenon is elision. Elide can also apply to the omission or cutting out of things other than letters. 
elucidate: (vb) [ih-loos-ih-dayt] To elucidate something is to make it clear or lucid, to throw light upon it. Footnotes are intended to elucidate the text. Elucidation is a form of enlightenment. 
emblazon: (vb) [em-blay-zin] To emblazon is to adorn richly, deck in brilliant colors. The word is sometimes used to mean "proclaim" or "extol."
emend: (vb) [ih-men'd] To emend is to correct or edit. Do not confuse emend with amend, which implies the making of minor alterations, in a somewhat less sweeping way, and is also used in connection with the changing of a law or proposed law amendment.
emeritus: (adj) [ih-merr-ih-tus] This word applies to a person who has retired while retaining his honorary title and is usually found in the expression professor emeritus. 
emote: (vb) [ih-moht] One who emotes is acting emotionally. The American public emoted when they first viewed the released Iranian hostages. Emote is sometimes used pejoratively, to indicate theatrical behavior. 
empirical: (adj) [em-peer-ih-kul] An empirical judgement or opinion is one based on observation and experience, as opposed to theory. After working out a theory, it is often well to get it confirmed empirically. 
emulate: (vb) [em-yuh-layt] To emulate is to imitate, with the implication of an attempt to equal or surpass. The word sometimes takes on the implication of a successful rivalry. 
encomium: (n) [en-koe-mee-um] Encomium is high praise. The word implies a certain degree of formality, as in an official speech or situation. 
endemic: (adj) [en-dem-ik] Anything endemic is characteristic, peculiar to a particular place, race, nation, sect. This word is used, for example, of diseases that flourish regularly in certain parts of the world. Not only illnesses, but also customs and folkways can be said to be endemic to a particular place or sect.
enervate: (vb) [en-ur-vayt] To enervate someone is to weaken him and lessen his vitality. 
enigmatic: (adj) [en-ig-mat-ik] Enigmatic people and things are puzzling and obscure. 
enmity: (n) [en-muh-tee] Enmity is hostility, antagonism. Enmity all too often develops among heirs as they struggle over the division of an estate. 
ennui: (n) [ahn-wee] Ennui is boredom. It is a word taken bodily from the French, and expresses world-weariness and emptiness of feeling, often felt by the "man who has everything." 
entity: (n) [en-tih-tee] This word, often a rather elevated synonym for "thing," covers anything having a distinct existence. 
envisage: (vb) [en-viz-ij not en-viz-azh] To envisage something is to visualize something or imagine it. Envisage can also imply foresee. 
ephemeral: (adj) [ih-fem-uh-rul] What is ephemeral is short-lived, soon over and done with. 
epicure: (n) [ep-uh-kyoor] An epicure is a gourmet, a fastidious diner who understands and lays great stress upon the refinements of cooking and relishes the best of food and drink. Do not apply epicure to those who too fondly love their food and drink without discrimination.
epigram: (n) [ep-uh-gram] Epigrams are witticisms, witty sayings, wisecracks, tersely expressed, often inverse. Epigram applies particularly to a brief satirical poem, usually ending with a terse, witty observation. 
epitaph: (n) [ep-uh-taf] An epitaph is, literally, a tomb inscription, but the word is used more generally to cover any written praise of one who has passed on. Do not confuse epitaph with epithet. 
epithet: (n) [ep-uh-theht] An epithet is a descriptive word or phrase, often one that has become identified with a famous character, real or fictional. The phrase man's best friend is an epithet for dog. The Almighty and The Eternal are epithets for God.
epitome: (n) [ih-pit-uh-mee not ep-ih-tohme] The epitome of something is its embodiment, its typical representation. Most television commercials are the epitome of mediocrity.
equable: (adj) [ek-wuh-bul] Equable people are even-tempered, unvarying. People with equable temperaments are easy to get along with.  New Zealand is noted for its equable climate. Do not confuse equable with equitable (fair, just). 
equanimity: (n) [eh-kwah-nim-ih-tee] Equanimity is composure, calmness of temperament. 
equitable: (adj) [ek-wuh-tuh-bul] What is equitable is fair and just. The goal of any arbitration is to reach an equitable settlement. Do not confuse equitable with equable (even-tempered, unvarying).
equivocal: (adj) [ih-kwiv-uh-kul] This word can mean either 'uncertain, undetermined," or "questionable," depending on the context. You can't get a straight answer from people who equivocate. 
errant: (adj) [err-int] Errant has two distinct meanings. It can describe conduct that amounts to misbehaving. It can also mean "wandering aimlessly," as in an errant stream, an errant breeze, and in this use errant is a gentle, poetic word. 
ersatz: (adj) [ur-zahts] This word applies to anything that is synthetic, artificial, substitute; not the genuine article; something else, generally of inferior quality. The word is taken over bodily from the German, where it means "substitute." 
erudite: (adj) [err-yoo-dyt] Erudite means "learned" [learn-id], "scholarly." It is a fortunate thing to study under a group of erudite teachers. 
eschew: (vb) [es-choo] To eschew something is to shun or avoid it. The avoiding is not casual, but determined. Vegetarians eschew flesh, fish, and fowl.
esoteric: (adj) [es-uh-tair-ik] This adjective covers anything obscure, far out, beyond the grasp of most people. The word can apply to ideas, works of art, doctrines, systems of thought, philosophies, and the like. 
ethereal: (adj) [ih-theer-ee-ul not eye-theer-ee-ul] What is ethereal is light, delicate, airy. Some people radiate ethereal beauty, as though not of this world. 
etymology: (n) [et-uh-mahl-uh-jee] This word is used to mean "derivation," in the sense of the specific derivation of a particular word. From Gk. etymos (true) and logos (word). 
eulogy: (n) [yoo-luh-jee] Eulogy can mean either a specific speech or writing in praise of a person (usually deceased) or thing, as in a flowery eulogy that keeps a funeral service going for hours, or "praise" generally. 
euphemism: (n) [yoo-fuh-miz-em] This is the term applied to a mild or indirect word or phrase substituted for one considered too harsh or indelicate. Examples include underprivileged for poor and minority for black or Hispanic. The word can apply to either a specific case, or the general practice of resorting to such substitutes. 
euphonious: (adj) [yoo-foh-nee-us] This pleasant-sounding word means just that- "pleasant sounding."
euphoric: (adj) [yoo-for-ik] Euphoric expresses the mood of a person enjoying an exaggerated feeling of well-being. Its slang equivalent is "high." Usually, the word implies that the feeling is unjustified by the circumstances, or is entirely without a basis in reality. 
exacerbate: (vb) [ig-zass-ur-bayt] To exacerbate a situation is to worsen it, to aggravate it, in the sense of increasing its bitterness. 
excoriate: (vb) [ek-skor-ee-ayt] When you excoriate someone, you upbraid him scathingly, reprimand him harshly. Literally and physically, the word means "to flay," i.e., to strip the skin off (someone). 
excrement: (n) [ek-shruh-mint] Excrement is feces. It is broad enough to describe any bodily waste, but it almost always refers to fecal matter. 
exculpate: (vb) [ek-skull-payt] To exculpate someone is to free him from blame. Exculpate is synonymous with exonerate. 
execrable: (adj) [ek-suh-kruh-bul] Anyone or anything execrable is detestable, abominable, hateful. The Nazis were guilty of execrable acts against defenseless people. There is a related verb- to execrate. It can mean "to detest," or it can mean "to curse." 
exegesis: (n) [ek-suh-jee-sis] This word, taken over intact from Greek, means "interpretation," especially of Scripture, but applicable generally. 
exemplary: (adj) [ig-zem-pluh-ree] Exemplary acts are commendable; they set a high standard, an example worth imitating. Exemplary conduct sets an example for others.
exhort: (vb) [ig-zort] To exhort someone is to urge him, to advise him with great emphasis. Churchill exhorted his fellow Britons to sneer at Hitler's arrogance. 
exigency: (n) [ehk-sih-jin-see] Exigency is urgency. When the enemy attacks, there is sufficient exigency to justify calling out to the troops. The plural is used in the sense of "urgent needs, demands."
exonerate: (vb) [ig-zon-uh-rayt] To exonerate someone is to free him from blame. Exonerate is synonymous with exculpate. The production of a watertight alibi is the best way to be exonerated of complicity in a crime. 
exorcise: (vb) [ek-sor-size] One can exorcise (i.e., expel) an evil spirit from a person by prayer or religious rites. Or one can exorcise (i.e. free) a person or place from evil spirits or influences. 
expatiate: (vb) [ek-spay-shee-ayt] When you expatiate upon a subject, you are dwelling upon it at great length, going into it in great detail. Politicians should point our their own accomplishments rather than expatiate the other fellow's shortcomings. 
expiate: (vb) [ek-spee-ayt] To expiate one's guilt, misdeeds, or sins is to atone or make amends for them. St. Francis of Assisi expiated his sinful youth by renouncing worldly pleasures and devoting himself to religion. 
expostulate: (vb) [ek-spos-chuh-layt] To expostulate is to argue vigorously with someone in order to talk him out of doing something or to remonstrate against something he has done. Parents often expostulate with their children about the evils of marijuana, sleeping late, long hair, loud rock, etc. 
expropriate: (vb) [eks-pro-pree-ayt] When you take something away without the owner's consent, you expropriate it. Expropriate can apply to ideas as well as tangible property. 
expunge: (vb) [ik-spunj] Anything expunged is wiped out, erased, deleted. When a judge rules that certain testimony is irrelevant, he can order it expunged from the record. 
extempore: (adj, adv) [ik-stem-puh-ree] Anything that is, or happens, extempore is impromptu, done on the spur of the moment. Public figures giving press conferences must become skillful in answering questions from the audience extempore. A related adjective is extemporaneous meaning "impromptu, unrehearsed." 
extenuate: (vb) [ek-sten-yoo-ayt] To extenuate is to lessen the seriousness of an offense, or someone's guilt, or to make it seem less serious. Extenuating circumstances is a common phrase, to describe surrounding facts that partially excuse an offense or a fault. It is commonly said that youth extenuates a crime. 
extirpate: (vb) [ek-stir-payt] To extirpate something is to root it out, destroy it utterly, eradicate it, exterminate it. Smallpox has been practically extirpated in the civilized world. 
extrapolate: (vb) [ik-strap-uh-layt] To extrapolate is to make a future estimate based on past data. Speculators extrapolate the future action of stocks from past performance. Sometimes the word has the meaning of "conjecture" or "predict." 
exuberant: (adj) [ig-zoo-buh-rint] Anyone who is exuberant is in high spirits, full of enthusiasm. Sweeping views of the countryside make hikers exuberant. 
facet: (n) [fas-it] Facet, in its figurative sense, means "aspect" or "phase" or "angle" of a situation, and in its literal sense, one of the many polished "faces" of a gem. A careful jeweler will examine every facet of a gem. 
facile: (adj) [fas-ul] A public speaker should be facile, able to act and perform with ease. A facile speaker can face any audience impromptu, without notes. Something managed with ease is said to be facile, like a facile victory, one easily won. There is danger, however, in using this word, because it can imply superficiality. One must be sure that the context makes it clear whether facile is being used as a compliment or a pejorative. 
facilitate: (vb) [fuh-sil-ih-tayt] Look at facile for the origin of this word, which means to "make easy, help along." Planning ahead always facilitates any task. 
fallacious: (adj) [fuh-lay-shis] A fallacious argument is one that is unsound and misleading. It is based upon a fallacy, an erroneous or mistaken belief based, in turn, upon unsound reasoning. The arguments that raged, and still rage, against the Darwinian theory of evolution were and are fallacious, based on dogma and against scientific evidence. 
fallow: (adj) [fal'-oh] Land left plowed but unseeded is said to be fallow. from that literal meaning, we get the metaphorical meanings "dormant, inactive, unproductive." 
falter: (vb) [fall-tur] To falter is to waver, vacillate. It also means "to stumble, totter," and sometimes "to give away." Its usual meanings are "waver" and "stumble." 
farrago: (n) [fuh-rah-go] This musical-sounding word is taken over without change from the Latin, where its literal meaning is "mash" (mixed cattle fodder) and figurative sense is any "mixture" or "medley." Synonyms are olio and gallimaufry. 
fatuous: (adj) [fat-choo-us] Fatuous means "inane" or "foolish," with a strong implication of complacency and smug self-satisfaction. This word is like a derogatory replacement for silly, with the added coloration of smug and the implication of "stupid." 
feasible: (adj) [fee-zuh-bul] This is a "can do" word. Feasible describes something that can be accomplished, a goal that is not beyond wild dreams, something workable. 
feckless: (adj) [fek-lis] A feckless person is untrustworthy because he is incompetent, feeble, or irresponsible, lazy without spirit or energy, or all of these unpleasant things. Don't trust a feckless person with any responsibilities.
fecund: (adj) [fee-kund] Anything or anyone fecund is productive, fertile. Fecund trees produce blossoms and fruit and fecund minds produce a variety of ideas, innovations, and inventions. 
feisty: (adj) [fy-stee] If you are feisty, you are full of spirit, lively, ready for anything. Students get into a feisty mood once exams are over. Feisty can also mean "short-tempered and quarrelsome." Feisty is a picturesque word, but colloquial, not to be used in formal contexts.
felicitate: (vb) [fuh-lis-ih-tayt] When you felicitate someone, you are congratulating him. The act is called felicitation. 
felicitous: (adj) [fuh-lis-ih-tus] This word, stemming from the Latin noun felicitas (success, good fortune), applies to things, concrete or abstract, that are well-suited, appropriate, well-chosen, like felicitous remarks or the felicitous jokes with which a talented speaker puts his audience at ease.
feral: (adj) [fair-ul] Feral means "wild or savage." Animals that have been domesticated and then get loose usually revert to a feral state. Feral can be applied to human animals as well, when they are cruel to the point of savagery. 
ferret: (vb) [ferr-it] Usually followed by out. When you rummage around and eventually find something, you have ferreted it out. The verb is taken from then noun ferret, an animal that can be domesticated and trained to smell and drive out rabbits and rats. 
festoon: (n, vb) [feh-stoon] A festoon is a chain of flowers or ribbons hung in a loop as a decoration. To festoon something is, literally, to decorate it with festoons. The verb can be used figuratively (and picturesquely) as a vivid description of situations where something or someone is adorned or surrounded in a smothering sort of way.
fetid: (adj) [fet'id] An adjective to describe a very unpleasant state of affairs. It means "stinking," or, more delicately, "malodorous." 
fey: (adj) [fay] Fey people may be amusing but somewhat difficult to deal with. They are eccentric, in a whimsical way, unworldly, appear to be a little bit "touched," and tend to behave irresponsibly. The word fey was originally applied to anyone believed to be conscious of impending doom, even death. It probably acquired its meaning as a result of confusion with the word fay, an uncommon synonym of fairy. 
fiasco: (n) [fee-ass-ko] A fiasco is a total and humiliating failure. Fiasco is an Italian word meaning, literally, "straw-covered wine bottle," and figuratively, "disastrous failure." The connection between the two meanings is lost in history. 
fiat: (n) [fy-aht] A fiat is a decree, and comes directly from the Latin fiat, which means "Let it be done." Less technically, a fiat is an order, whether issued under authority or arbitrarily, like some of those laid down by the big boss in a company or political party. 
fiduciary: (n, adj) [fih-doo-she-air-ee] This word applies to a person or firm handling assets of a third party, like a trustee, executor, guardian or anyone else in a position of trust. The connection between the owner and the one entrusted with the assets is called a fiduciary relationship.
figurative: (adj) [fig-ye-ruh-tiv] The figurative use of a word or phrase involves a figure of speech (we get figurative from figure), especially a metaphor; something other than the literal use of the term. 
finite: (adj) [fy-nyht] Anything finite has limits, is limited in some way, whether in time, space, numerically, or otherwise. Finite is the opposite of infinite. 
flaccid: (adj) [flak-sid] The literal meaning is limp and flabby. Figuratively, the word means "weak, ineffectual, unimpressive." 
flagellate: (vb) [flaj-uh-lit not fluh-gell-it] To flagellate is to whip or flog. Figuratively, the word is used in the sense of punish, especially with severe criticism. The word can also be used in the sense of "driving" or "urging" someone or oneself, for instance, to fulfill his deadline.
flamboyant: (adj) [flam-boy-int] Flamboyant describes anyone or anything outstandingly showy or striking. International playboys addicted to fast women and fast cars have a flamboyant life style. 
flatulent: (adj) [flatch-uh-lint not flatch-yoo-lint] A word that describes an unpleasant condition, meaning "suffering from gas" or "causing gas" (in the digestive tract). Beans are one of the most flatulent foods. The word is also used figuratively to describe writing that is bombastic, pompous, turgid, and overwritten. 
flay: (vb) [flay] A most unpleasant word, synonymous with excoriate, in both its literal and figurative meanings. To flay is to strip off the skin, hide or any outer covering (usually) of a living creature; in other words, to skin alive. In the figurative sense, to flay means "to criticize scathingly." 
flippant: (adj) [flip-int] A term applied to anything frivolous or disrespectful, not to be taken seriously, often shortened to flip, which is a flippant abbreviation of flippant. Flippant is a pejorative, a disparaging word suggestive of a somewhat flighty, disrespectful attitude towards a subject matter or the person addressed, or both.
flout: (vb) [flout] To flout is to scorn, mock, scoff at, disdain, in the way the Beat Generation flouted the accepted rules of social conduct. Do not confuse flout with flaunt, which means to "show off, display ostentatiously." Many people, unfortunately, flout the distinction, and flaunt their flouting. 
foible: (n) [foy-bul] A word that comes from the French word faible, meaning "weak." It describes minor, relatively harmless weakness in a person's character, and is especially appropriate when that character is otherwise a strong one. 
foment: (vb) [foh-mint] Foment means to "instigate, promote," in the sense of "get (something moving or going," and is usually applied in an unfavorable way. Do not confuse foment with ferment, which has a figurative meaning- "to seethe" (with excitement or agitation). 
font: (n) [font] A font is a church basin, usually of stone, for holding baptism water, a holy water receptacle. But the word is often used figuratively to mean "source" or "fountainhead." A learned work can be said to be a font of information on a subject. The other meaning of font is "set of type." 
foray: (n, vb) [for-ay] A foray is a sudden id, usually to take plunder; to foray is to make such a raid. Foray is also used in a figurative sense- companies often make forays on their competitors to get hold of personnel with knowhow. 
force majeure: (n, adj) [force mah zhoor] This is a term taken over bodily from the French, meaning "superior force;" in other words, an unforeseeable, uncontrollable event that makes it impossible to perform one's obligations (under a contract) and exempts him, in most cases, from liability for failure to live up to his agreement. Force majeure is commonly known as "an act of God." 
forensic: (adj) [fuh-ren-sik] This word describes things having to do with the law and the courts. 
formidable: (adj) [for-mih-duh-bul] A formidable person or thing is one to be feared or dreaded. Formidable things and people are intimidating, like a six-and-a-half-footer or a precipitous mountain that blocks the way. The word can also mean "awe-inspiring" or "powerful." 
fortuitous: (adj) [for-tyoo-ih-tus] A fortuitous meeting or event is one that happens by chance. Fortuitous means "accidental" and relates to happenings that are not prearranged, but are result purely of happenstance. Probably as a result of confusion with the word fortunate similarity of sound, fortuitous can mean "fortunate" or "lucky," but it ought to be reserved for chance happenings. 
founder: (vb) [found-ur] When a ship founders, it's all over- to founder, when it comes to ships, is to sink; and a foundering ship is headed for Davey Jones's locker. When plants founder, it's likewise all over- plans that founder fail, fizzle out. 
fractious: (adj) [frak-shis] A fractious person is peevish and irritable. Fractious also has the sense of "unruly." A fractious boss can make the life of the entire office staff miserable. 
fruition: (n) [froo-ish-in] Fruition is fulfillment, attainment, realization, results achieved. The word is related to fruit, which is the tangible result of years of work and waiting, from the planting of the seed to the picking. 
fulminate: (vb) [full-muh-nayt] Usually followed by against to fulminate is to send forth denunciations and condemnation. Public officials observe the custom of fulminating against crime in the streets. 
fulsome: (adj) [full-sum] Anything, be it praise or language or ostentatious display, can be said to be fulsome, which means, in general, "offensively excessive." The "nouveaux riches" too often display themselves in fulsome array. The commonest use of this word is in the phrase fulsome praise, which is exaggerated and insincere and smacks of the sycophant or toady.
furtive: (adj) [fur-tiv] Furtive describes the qualities of stealth, slyness, shiftiness, sneakiness. One's furtive manner can make him look guilty. 
fusillade: (n) [fyoo-suh-layd] Technically, a fusillade is a military term signifying a "simultaneous discharge of arms," the sort of bombardment the enemy keeps up from across the river in war stories. 
gadfly: (n) [gad-fly] A gadfly is a species of fly that annoys cattle. The word is commonly used figuratively, to mean any "pest" or anyone who annoys people by continual carping, or persistently pesters others with schemes, demands for action, etc. 
garrulous: (adj) [gar-uh-lus] A garrulous person is talkative and keeps rambling on, usually about trivial manners.
gauche: (adj) [goh'sh] Gauche people are crude, uncouth, and awkward, lacking in social grade and insensitive. Gauche may be applied to conduct as well to people.
generic: (adj) [juh-nair-ik] What is generic is general, common, in the sense of "applicable to a whole class." Crime is generic for any breach of the penal code, all the way from illegal loitering to rape or murder. 
genesis: (n) [jen-uh-sis] The genesis of anything is its origin or source. Some of us may think of the Big Bang as the genesis of all. Taken over intact from the Greek.
genre: (n) [zhon-ruh] A genre is an artistic style. Genre, particularly applied to painting, has the special meaning of "scenes of everyday life." Taken over from the French (kind, type).
gentry: (n) [jen-tree] This word describes upper-class people (well-born and well-bred). It is the gentry who attend polo games and yacht races, rather than baseball and football games. Another use is to describe the people of any particular class or group- the newspaper gentry, the boxing gentry, etc.
germane: (adj) [jur-may'n] What is germane to a subject is relevant, pertinent. This word has an interesting derivation, from Latin germanus (born of the same parents).
googol: (n) [goo-gul] A googol is an astronomical number, the largest that can be expressed in words, used primarily to measure the unimaginable distances of outer space. A googol is 10 to the 100th power. 
gormandize: (vb) [gor-min-deez] To gormandize is to eat gluttonously. A gourmand, sometimes spelled gourmand, is a person who simply likes his food; a gourmet is a connoisseur of good food. The emphasis on gourmand is quantity and excessive feeding. Gormandize applies only to gluttons. 
gossamer: (n) [goss-uh-mur] Technically, gossamer is the filmy cobweb left by spiders on glass or bushes, but it is commonly used as a noun or adjective, somewhat poetically, to describe any thin, delicate fabric. 
grandiloquence: (n) [gran-dil-uh-kwints] Grandiloquence is the term applied to high-flown, bombastic speech. The adjective is grandiloquent, meaning "pompous, bombastic." 
gratuitous: (adj) [gruh-too-ih-tus] Gratuitous can mean either "given free of charge" or "uncalled for, unprovoked." In the second sense- sometimes, without your having said a word, the other fellow makes a gratuitous remark that hurts you to the quick. In this sense the word is often used in the phrase gratuitous insult.
gratuity: (n) [gruh-too-ih-tee] This term covers anything given voluntarily, i.e., not legally required, like a top or gift over and above the regular price of something or payment due for services. The most common form of gratuity is a tip. 
gravamen: (n) [gruh-vay-min] The gravamen of an accusation (especially in the law) is its material part. In an armed robbery case, the gravamen of the charge is the carrying of a loaded gun. Generally speaking, the gravamen is that issue that weights most heavily in an accusation or legal action.
gregarious: (adj) [gruh-gair-ee-us] A gregarious person is sociable, fond of company, a good mixer. Gregarious people like to go out a lot and be part of a group. 
guise: (n) [gyz] Guise has a number of uses; semblance, assumed appearance, style of dress. Guise is more commonly used to mean "semblance" - Lots of bad advice is given to trusting innocents under the guise of expertise.
habituate: (vb) [huh-bich-yoo-ayt] To habituate someone to something is to get him accustomed to it, used to it, gradually get him to accept it as normal, as a matter of course. A habitude is one's usual condition or character.
hackneyed: (adj) [hak-need] Hackneyed words and phrases are trite, made stale from overuse. 
halcyon: (adj) [hal-see-un] What is halcyon is carefree and happy. The word can mean "tranquil, peaceful," as in halcyon weather, but it usually evokes the image of past joyous, carefree times. How sweet to recall the halcyon days of youth!
harbinger: (n) [har-bin-jur] Someone or something that signals the approach of things to come is a harbinger. A harbinger may be called a "forerunner." 
harridan: (n) [hair-uh-din] This is a forceful word for a scolding hag, an ill-tempered old woman. The Queen of Hearts in Alice in Wonderland is a fine prototype. 
hedonist: (n) [hee-duh-nist] A hedonist is one who believes that pleasure is the chief aim in life and lives that way. The doctrine is called hedonism. 
hegemony: (n) [huh-jem-uh-nee not hed'g-moh-nee] This word is used to denote dominant influence, especially of one nation or state over the others. The U.S.S.R. has hegemony over a number of satellite states. This word comes from Greek hegemonia (supremacy).
hegira: (n) [heh-jye-ruh] A hegira is a journey to a pleasanter place. In the twenties, many American intellectuals made a hegira to the more enlightened cities of Europe. The original hegira was Muhammad's flight from Mecca to Medina in 622 A.D. to escape persecution. 
heinous: (adj) [hey-nis] This strong word should not be weakened by overuse. Save it to mean "excessively evil, positively hateful." Treason is a heinous offense. Anything heinous is about as bad as possible, foul and abominable. 
hermaphrodite: (n) [hur-mahf-ruh-dyt] A hermaphrodite is living organism with both male and female organs of sex. The adjective hermaphrodite or hermaphroditic means "bisexual." 
heterogeneous: (adj) [het-uh-ruh-jee-nee-us] This word means "composed of different kinds." Homogeneous means "composed of the same kind." 
heuristic: (adj) [hyoo-ris-tik] This term is applied to teaching methods and systems, and means "helping to learn," encouraging (students) to find out for themselves. Heuristic teaching methods involve trial-and-error procedures to find solutions, somewhat akin to the Socratic method of teaching by means of question and answer. 
hiatus: (n) [hie-ay-tus] A hiatus is a gap. The word is synonymous with lacuna. A hiatus may be abstract as well as physical- there is often a wide hiatus between theory and practice. 
hie: (vb) [hye] To hie is to hasten. This word evokes a pleasant nostalgic atmosphere. Once off the ship, a sailor will often hie to meet his lady love. 
homily: (n) [hom-uh-lee] A homily is a sermon, a moralizing talk, usually with the implication of tedious length and dullness. Reformers are fond of delivering homilies to condemned criminals. 
honorarium: (n) [on-uh-rair-ee-um] Literally, an honorarium is a voluntary payment for services when there is no legal obligation to pay. It is a more or less euphemistic substitute for fee. Royalty will sometimes bestow an honorarium upon a physician or other professional. 
hubris: (n) [hyoo-bris] Hubris is arrogance, insolent pride (the kind that goeth before a fall). Hubris is the opposite of modesty. It is proper to be proud of your accomplishments, but not to give way to hubris. 
hyperbole: (n) [hye-pur-buh-lee] Hyperbole is exaggeration, intentionally used as a figure of speech. Hyperbole is not meant to be taken literally. 
hypothesis: (n) [hie-poth-uh-sis] A hypothesis is a supposition or theory used to explain an occurrence in the absence of actual proof. 
iconoclast: (n) [eye-kon-uh-klast] One who challenges accepted beliefs is an iconoclast. The word comes from two Greek words, eikon (image, idol) and klastes (breaker), so that literally an iconoclast is an "image-breaker." Most modern scientists are iconoclasts where religious beliefs are concerned. 
idyllic: (adj) [eye-dil-ik] Anything idyllic is happily peaceful or charmingly romantic. Idyllic is the adjective form of the noun idyll, a poem or prose piece about pastoral scenes or sweet charming happenings. 
ignominy: (n) [ig-nuh-min-ee] This word applies to either the disgrace resulting from a shameful act or the dishonorable conduct itself. 
illicit: (adj) [ih-lis-it] Illicit means "unlawful." The word has more the flavor of "forbidden" than "unlawful" in the phrase illicit love. One rarely sees the antonym licit.
illusory: (adj) [il-loo-ser-ee] This word describes things that are deceptive, that cause a false impression, an illusion. People have the illusory impression that money puts an end to all troubles. 
imbibe: (vb) [im-bibe] To imbibe is to drink. Englishmen imbibe enormous quantities of tea. The verb can be used figuratively in the sense of "drink in, absorb." It is hoped that students will imbibe knowledge and ideas by paying attention to their college courses. 
imbroglio: (n) [im-brole-yo] This word has several meanings- "confused situation," "bitter misunderstanding," and "violent disagreement." The word was taken over intact from the Italian, where it means "entanglement." 
immemorial: (adj) [im-muh-mor-ee-ul] This word describes things that extend back beyond memory. They can be intangible things, like folkways that have existed from time immemorial. 
immutable: (adj) [ih-myoo-tuh-bul] What is immutable is unchangeable, like the immutable laws of nature, or like human nature that everybody says "you can't change." 
impassive: (adj) [im-pass-iv] Impassive people neither feel nor show emotion. It is disconcerting to recount a hair-raising adventure and have your listener just sit there impassively. Experienced soldiers are impassive in the face of danger.
impecunious: (adj) [im-puh-kyoo-nee-us] Impecunious describes the unfortunate state of being penniless. It was Abe Lincoln who is alleged to have said that money in itself is not all that important, but that its absence can be mighty inconvenient.
impede: (vb) [im-peed] To impede is to hinder. Steep hills impede a hiker's progress. Impede is derived from Latin impedire (literally, to entangle the feet).
imperious: (adj) [im-peer-ee-us] An imperious person is domineering, bossy, dictatorial. You can't argue with an imperious office manager. Imperious manners make people unapproachable and rule out suggestions. 
imperturbable: (adj) [im-pur-tur-buh-bul] An imperturbable person is calm, not easily excited, impassive, unlikely to be easily disconcerted. Buddha is always represented as serene and imperturbable. Unflappable is a (mostly British) synonym for this word, and imperturbability and unflappability are desired traits in a leader.
implacable: (adj) [im-plak-uh-bul] Implacable people are relentless and cannot be pacified. Pleas for mercy to implacable judges fall on deaf ears.
implement: (vb) [im-pluh-ment] To implement something (a plan, a promise) is to put it into effect, carry it out. One should avoid making promises that can't be implemented.
implicate: (vb) [im-pluh-kayt] When you implicate someone in a crime or a conspiracy, you involve him in it, or show him to be involved. The noun implication can refer to the state of being implicated, but is almost always used to mean "something implied," something to be inferred from something else.
implicit: (adj) [im-plis-iht] This word has two distinct uses. It can mean "implied, taken for granted." It can also mean "unquestioning, absolute." The armed forces expect implicit obedience from all personnel. 
imponderable: (n) [im-pon-dur-uh-bul] Anything difficult to estimate is imponderable. Weather is often an imponderable factor in planning the day's activities. The word is more often used as a noun. The implication is that no matter how deeply you ponder something imponderable, you can't predict the possibilities. 
importune: (vb) [im-por-toon] When you importune someone, you are pressing him urgently and requesting something of him persistently. Government officials have to get used to being importuned by all sorts of special interests. The related adjective is importunate [im-por-chuh-nit] meaning "persistent in making requests."
impugn: (vb) [im-pyoon] To impugn something is to challenge it, to call it in question, to discredit it. In olden times, men were quick to impugn one another's honor and offer to duel. Do not confuse impugn with impute.
impute: (vb) [im-pyoot] When you attribute or ascribe a result or quality to anything or anybody, you are imputing it. Impute often applies to unjust accusation, but good things as well as bad may be imputed. The ancients imputed both good fortune and bad to the gods. 
incarnate: (adj) [in-kar-nit] Incarnate means "personified." Hitler was evil incarnate. The related noun, incarnation means "embodiment." 
inchoate: (adj) [in-koh-it] Things just begun, undeveloped and unorganized, can be described as inchoate. When one has not organized his argument, his presentation all too often turns out to be an inchoate jumble of generalizations.
incipient: (adj) [in-sip-ee-int] Anything incipient is just beginning, in an initial stage of development. Incipient can apply to anything hatching or brewing, all the way from a scratchy throat to a romance.
inclement: (adj) [in-klem-int] Inclement means "harsh, severe." Inclement weather is bitter weather, and that is the way this word is used for the most part. Applied to people, it means "cruel, without mercy," but this is not a common use. 
incognito: (n, adj, adv) [in-kog-nee-toh] The usual use of incognito is as an adverb in the expression travelling incognito. As assumed identity is also known as an incognito. From Latin incognitus (unrecognized). 
incongruous: (adj) [in-kun'g-groo-us] This that are incongruous are out of keeping with one another. John Tyndall, the English physicist, wrote of superstition as "incongruous with intelligence." 
increment: (n) [in-kruh-ment] An increment is an increase, growth or gain, something added. A raise in salary is an increment.
incredulous: (adj) [in-krej-uh-lus] Incredulous people are skeptical, inclined not to believe. Incredulous people cramp your style when you attempt to recount your adventures. A surprising large number of people were incredulous about our moon landings, insisting that the films were special effects created in the studio.
inculcate: (vb) [in-kul-kayt] To inculcate is to teach by persistent urging, to implant (ideas, habits) through constant admonition. It is a good idea to inculcate steady habits in young people. One can inculcate something (a habit, a virtue, an idea) in a person, or inculcate the person with an idea.
incumbent: (n, adj) [in-kum-bint] Incumbent, as an adjective, usually followed by on or upon, means "obligatory." As an adjective, incumbent has another distinct meaning- "holding office." By itself, as a noun, it means "office-holder." 
incubus: (n) [in-kyoo-bus] This was a term applied to a male demon believed, in the olden days, to swoop down on sleeping women and have sexual intercourse with them in their sleep. Incubus has come to mean "nightmare," whether literally or figuratively.
indigenous: (adj) [in-kij-ih-nus] Indigenous means "native," in the sense of "characteristic, inherent." Indigenous can describe anything concrete or abstract. From Late Latin indigenus (native).
indigent: (adj) [in-dih-jint] An indigent person is needy, impoverished, one who lacks the necessities of life. Our welfare system provides for the indigent. 
indolent: (adj) [in-duh-lint] An indolent person is lazy and slothful and will do anything to avoid exerting himself. The word evokes the image of someone having a nice, easy time-- being lazy and loving every minute of it. 
ineffable: (adj) [in-ef-uh-bul] This word is capable of two contrary interpretations. It can mean "inexpressible" in a positive sense- A good wife can bring a mean years of ineffable happiness. It can also mean "unspeakable," in quite a negative sense. 
ineluctable: (adj) [in-uh-luk-tuh-bul] What is ineluctable is inescapable, something that cannot be avoided and must happen. Those who believe in predestination are convinced that we must all suffer our ineluctable destinies. 
ineptitude: (n) [in-ep-tih-tood] Ineptitude can denote unfitness generally, or lack of skill or aptitude for a particular job. Ineptitude can also mean "unsuitability, inappropriateness." 
ingenuous: (adj) [in-jen-yoo-us] An ingenuous person is free from deceit, artless. Ingenuous is the opposite of wily. Children are refreshingly- sometimes disconcertingly- ingenuous.
innate: (adj) [ih-nayt] What is innate is inborn. An innate quality is one you are born with. Innate can take on the meaning "inherent, built in."  If there is an innate defect in the system upon which a machine is based, it simply won't work.
innocuous: (adj) [ih-nok-yoo-us] Anything innocuous is harmless. By extension innocuous can mean "harmless" in the sense of "inoffensive." Innocuous can also take on the meaning "unexciting, vapid." 
innuendo: (n) [in-yoo-en-doh] An innuendo is a veiled intimation or insinuation of a derogatory nature, an equivocal or ambiguous allusion, reflecting on someone's character, honesty, ability, etc. Innuendo is a handy tool with which to destroy a person's reputation without violating the law against libel or defamation of character.
inordinate: (adj) [in-or-dih-nit] Inordinate has a number of meanings. It can mean "excessive." Another meaning is "disorderly." A further meaning meaning is "irregular." The second and third uses should be avoided; the word would generally be understood to mean "excessive," despite its origin in Latin, meaning "disorderly, confused." 
inscrutable: (adj) [in-skroo-tuh-bul] This word means "unfathomable, mysterious," like the smile on the many images of Buddha or the face of the Cheshire cat.
insouciant: (adj) [in-soo-see-int not in-soo-see-ant] One who is insouciant is unconcerned and carefree. Happy, insouciant people are good company; they don't burden you with worries and problems.
insular: (adj) [in-suh-lur] Literally, this word means "of or pertaining to islands." Its more common figurative use is to describe people who are narrow-minded, like isolated island people with resulting narrow, parochial views. 
integument: (n) [in-teg-yuh-mint] An integument is, literally, a natural covering, such as an animal's skin, or the rind or husk of a plant or vegetable. By extension, it has been broadened to include any covering.
interdict: (vb) [in-tur-dikt] To interdict is to forbid, especially with the implication of an authoritative prohibition, as by a church or civil authority. In a war, trading with the enemy is strictly interdicted. 
interlocutor: (n) [in-tur-loh-kyoo-ter] Anyone participating in a conversation is an interlocutor, but the term implies that the conversation or dialogue is of an official nature of a high level, like, for instance, the SALT talks. The adjective interlocutory has the wholly distinct meaning in legal parlance of "intermediate." 
interpolate: (vb) [in-tur-puh-layt] To interpolate something into a text is to insert it, especially with the implication that the new material is spurious and has been inserted without authorization and for purposes of deception. 
intractable: (adj) [in-trakt-uh-bul] Anyone or anything that is intractable is stubborn, hard to manage, obstinate. This adjective can apply as well to material as to people. Understandably, sculptors avoid intractable material.
intransigent: (n, adj) [in-tran-sih-jint] An intransigent person is stubborn, unbending, inflexible, unwilling to compromise. This word can be used as a noun denoting a person adamant in his convictions, especially in politics. The adjective is a little like intractable, but qualitatively stronger. 
intrepid: (adj) [in-trep-id] An intrepid person is fearless, bold, ready to take recognized risks. Intrepid is derived from the Latin negative prefix in- plus trepidus (anxious, worried).
intuit: (vb) [in-too-it] To intuit something is to know it instinctively, i.e., through direct insight without any reasoning, without having to think or be told about it. Sensitive and imaginative people intuit the motives of others. People who intuit are called intuitive. Intuit is the result of the back formation from intuitive.
inundate: (vb) [in-un-dayt] To inundate is, literally, to flood or overflow; figuratively, to overwhelm or deluge. The noun is inundation. 
inure, enure: (vb) [in-yoor] To inure is to accustom, to habituate. The flood of advertising and public relations has inured the public to a false set of values. This word has a wholly different meaning in law, in the phrase inure to the benefit of. Inure, in this sense, has the effect of operate.
invective: (n, adj) [in-vek-tiv] As a noun, invective denotes a violent, abusive attack in words, written or oral; as an adjective, it describes that sort of attack. The verb is to inveigh, which means "to use invective, to rail" against someone or something.
inviolate: (adj) [in-vye-uh-lit] Anything inviolate is free from attack, desecration, or outrage. This word is also used somewhat less dramatically in the sense of "freedom from alteration." This word is somewhat different from the related adjective inviolable, meaning "secure" (from invasion, destruction, corruption, etc.). 
irascible: (adj) [ih-ras-uh-bul] An irascible person is short tempered and easily roused to anger. Shrews are irascible. 
issue: (n) [ish-yoo] In addition to its many other common meanings, issue means "offspring, descendants." 
iterate: (vb) [it-uh-rayt] To iterate something is to say or do it repeatedly. The commoner form is reiterate, which would seem to constitute a tautology, like saying "re-repeat." Once you've made your point, it is unwise to keep iterating the argument. It is likely that you will run across reiterate much oftener than iterate, and that it will mean "say again" rather than "do again." 
jejune: (adj) [jih-joon] This word means "insipid, childish." Literally, jejune means "unnourishing," as in a jejune diet. The sense "childish" is a later addition, probably from confusion with "juvenile." 
jettison: (n, vb) [jet-ih-sun] Jettison is the act of throwing cargo overboard to lighten a vessel, and is also the verb that describes such action. By extension, jettison has come to apply to getting rid of any burden, anything unwanted. In that sense, it is a synonym with discard. In connection with the original maritime usage, there is the related word jetsam, describing the material thrown overboard. 
jingoism: (n) [jing-go-iz-um] This expressive word describes excessive chauvinism, combined with a bellicose attitude towards foreign countries. A jingo or jingoist is a person who proclaims far and wide his patriotism, urges preparedness and talks up a tough foreign policy. 
jocular: (adj) [jok-yuh-lur] A jocular remark is joking, facetious, tongue-in-cheek, jesting, not to be taken seriously. Jocular implies kidding, rather than unkindness. 
journeyman: (n) [jur-nee-min] A journeyman is a reliable worker, competent but not exceptional. Originally the word applied to a person hired to work for a day, or by the day. It has come to be used where one wants to indicate that the worker in question is capable but far from outstanding. 
juxtapose: (vb) [juk-stuh-pohz] When you juxtapose two (or more) things, you place them side by side. The implication of this word is to call attention to the combining, whether the objects juxtaposed form a bizarre combination or are mutually enhancing. 
karma: (n) [kar-muh] This poetic word, borrowed from Buddhist and Hindu theology, is loosely and commonly used to mean "fate" or "destiny." Technically, the word denotes the sum total of one's deeds in one life which can decide his fate in the next incarnation.
keen: (vb) [keen] To keen is to wail. Used as a noun, a keen is an Irish funeral song characterized by wailing, and to keen, in Irish folkways, is to utter such a keen. A keener is a professional mourner, usually a female engaged for wakes. 
ken: (n) [kehn] Ken is a range of knowledge. This rather poetic word is often found in the expressions within my ken, outside my ken, beyond my ken. 
kinetic: (adj) [kih-net-ik] This adjective describes anything having to do with motion, caused by motion or characterized by motion. Kinetic energy is energy caused by motion. The term is used in the arts as well as in physics. 
kite: (vb) [kyht] A kite is a bad check, promissory note, or other piece of negotiable commercial paper that has nothing behind it and is worthless. It is used by a dishonest person to raise money or get temporary credit, and the verb to kite is to issue such a check, note, etc.
kitsch: (n) [kitch] This word, borrowed from the German, describes trashy art, without taste or aesthetic value, usually pretentious, intended to appeal to the popular taste, marked by slick sensationalism or sentimentality or both. 
knell: (n, vb) [nell] Knell describes the sound of a bell, rung in a slow beat, usually to mark a death or a funeral. Knell is also a verb.
kowtow: (vb) [kow-tow] To kowtow is to act with servility, show exaggerated respect, behave obsequiously. The verb is usually followed by the preposition to or before. Kowtowing is a specialty of head waiters. Kowtow is a Chinese word, describing the former custom of kneeling and touching the ground with the forehead as a mark of submission or worship. 
kudos: (n) [koo-dohs] Kudos is praise, honor, glory. The word is always singular-- there is no such thing as one "kudo." 
lachrymose: (adj) [lak-ruh-mohs] The usual meaning of lachrymose is "tearful," but it can mean "mournful" as well.
laconic: (adj) [luh-kon-ik] A laconic person is terse; he uses few words and is the opposite of talkative, garrulous. The word comes from Laconica, the name of a region of ancient Greece dominated by Sparta, whose inhabitants were noted for their terse and pithy way of speaking.
lacuna: (n) [luh-kyoo-nuh] A lacuna is a gap, a missing part. Some people jump from a questionable premise to a conclusion, leaving a conspicuous lacuna in their reasoning. 
lagniappe: (n) [lan-yap] This word originated in Louisiana. It describes a bonus of one sort or another given to a customer as a token of goodwill, whether extra weight or measure, or a little something different. More loosely, the term is being used as a synonym for any tip or gratuity. 
lambent: (adj) [lam-bint] This word can be used in a number of ways. It can mean "flickering," playing lightly over a surface. Another meaning is "softly radiant." Still another meaning is "brilliantly playful." 
lament: (n) [luh-ment] A lament is an expression of grief, especially a vivid or passionate one. As a verb, to lament is to feel deep sorrow and regret. 
languish: (vb) [lang-wish] This word has several shades of meanings- to droop, "take on a melancholy air." 
lascivious: (adj) [luh-siv-ee-us] One who is lascivious is lewd and lustful. The dirty in dirty old man really means "lascivious." The word can also be used to describe anything intended to arouse lustful thoughts or sexual desires, like lascivious gestures or behavior, or lascivious drawings or photographs. 
lassitude: (n) [lass-uh-tood] Depending on the context, lassitude can describe either the unpleasant state of weariness, physical or mental, that results from malnutrition, strain, or oppressive climatic conditions, or a condition of languor, listlessness, and indifference. 
latent: (adj) [lay-tint] This word describes things that are in existence, but not yet active or apparent, things that are potential but not yet brought to the surface. There are undeveloped countries full of latent resources that need exploration and development. 
laudatory: (adj) [law-duh-tor-ee] Laudatory words and phrases are those that lavish praise. 
lax: (adj) [lax] People who are lax about doing a job are showing a lack of interest in doing it either well or on time. The implication is that they know better, but just don't give a damn. Lax means "negligent, lacking in strict observance," and is found in the familiar phrase lax morals. 
lay: (adj) [lay] Lay is an adjective applicable to one who is not a member, or connected with, a particular profession, especially law or medicine, but it can apply in its negative sense to any profession, e.g. accounting or architecture. A layman is a person who is not professionally qualified, or not ordained, as the case may be. Such people are known collectively as the laity.
lethargic: (adj) [luh-thar-jik] A lethargic person is sluggish, listless, without pep or energy, has that morning-after feeling. Lethargic people get left behind in the competitive world. 
leviathan: (n) [luh-vy-uh-thin] A leviathan is a monster, anything of wondrous size or vast power. Leviathan is the biblical name for a sea monster typifying evil. The term came to mean anything of enormous size and power. The word can be applied to anything huge.
lexicon: (n) [lek-sih-kon] A lexicon is a dictionary. The term is taken over intact from the Greek, and is most commonly applied to Greek, Latin, and Hebrew dictionaries. The word is used also to describe the special vocabulary of a particular person, profession, field of knowledge, etc. Figuratively, it can mean record. A lexicographer is one who compiles dictionaries.
licentious: (adj) [ly-sen-shus] A licentious person is lewd and immoral,  and disregards the proprieties, rules of human conduct. The word is almost always used to describe sexual excess and immorality. The word is related to license, in the sense of undue freedom from the usual restraints of social behavior, and, technically speaking, can be used without sexual connotations.
limn: (vb) [limn] To limn something is to portray or describe it. An articulate witness who testifies in a way that accurately limns the situation is a great help to the court. 
linchpin: (n) [linch-pin] Literally, this word applies to a pin through the end of an axle to keep the wheel on. It is used figuratively to characterize anybody or anything deemed vital to hold a situation together. 
limpid: (adj) [lim-pid] Limpid means "clear." Limpid can be used in a more abstract sense to express linguistic clarity, as a synonym for lucid. There is another meaning of the word, which is "serene, untroubled," but this sense is not often used.
lissome: (adj) [lis-um] Anyone or anything lissome is supple, lithe, agile. Somehow, the word has a lovely, lingering, wistful sound. Lissome is a variant of lithesome, a variant of lithe, which has the literary sense of "pliant, supple." 
litany: (n) [lit-uh-nee] Literally, a litany is a form of prayer consisting of a series of supplications to God, each followed by the same response from the worshippers. By extension, it has come to be applied to any monotonously repetitious recital. 
litigious: (adj) [lih-tij-us not lit-uh-gus] People who are litigious are always inclined to litigate (sue), aching for a lawsuit; by extension, argumentative, eager to pick a fight. 
logy: (adj) [loh-gee] When you feel logy, you are sluggish and lethargic. Often, when you take a sleeping pill, you feel logy all the following day.
loquacious: (adj) [loh-kway-shus] Loquacious people are talkative, garrulous; the opposite of laconic. The "truth drug" tends to get the truth out of people by opening them up and making them loquacious. 
Lothario: (n) [loh-thar-ee-oh] A Lothario is a rake, a seducer of women. The word comes from Lothario, a seducer in the tragedy The Fair Penitent, by Nicholas Rowe.
lugubrious: (adj) [loo-goo-bree-us not luh-goo-bree-us]  Anyone or anything lugubrious is gloomy, mournful. It can apply to things as well as people. Lugubriousness implies unrelieved gloom, and even more of it than the occasion justifies. 
lurid: (adj) [loor-id not lur-id] This word has several shades of meaning. It is most commonly met with the sense of "gruesome, shockingly vivid." The word often has the flavor of "sensational." It can also be used to describe something with a fiery flow, garishly red, as in an incredibly lurid sunset. 
macrocosm: (n) [mak-ruh-kahz-um] macrocosm and microcosm are antithetical. A macrocosm is the great world around us, the entire universe, and by extension, the whole of something, any great whole, a whole word in itself. 
maladroit: (adj) [mal-uh-droyt] A maladroit person or act is awkward, bungling, or the opposite of adroit. 
malaise: (n) [mah-layz, first a as in at] Malaise describes a general feeling of uneasiness, physical or mental or both. Sometimes you can't quite describe the way you feel; nothing localized or specific; just a general feeling of malaise.
malapropism: (n) [mal-uh-prop-iz-um] A malapropism is a ridiculous misuse of words. Apropos means "appropriate(ly)"; the prefix mal- changes its meaning to the opposite. 
malfeasance: (n) [mal-fee-zin's] Malfeasance is wrongdoing, especially misconduct in public office. Related words are misfeasance, the wrongful exercise of lawful authority, and nonfeasance, the failure to do what should have been done. The words are all common legal terms.
malign: (vb, adj) [muh-lyn] As a verb, to malign means "to slander, defame." As an adjective, malign can mean "harmful." It can also mean "malicious." 
malleable: (adj) [mal-ee-uh-bul] Malleable people are impressionable; applied to material used in manufacture or sculpture, malleable means "workable, shapeable." The figurative use of the word describes people who can be influenced, those with impressionable or tractable mentalities. 
manque: (adj) [mong-kay] This word, taken from the French, follows the noun it modifies, and means "unfulfilled, fallen short." A Beethoven manque is a failed composer, one who hasn't made it. Manque is a form of the French verb manuer (to miss, fail, lack).
martinet: (n) [mar-tih-net] A martinet is a strict disciplinarian, one who demands obedience without question. The term, derived from the seventeenth-century French General Jean Martinet, who invented a new military drill system, is often applied in military circles, but can be descriptive of anyone.
masticate: To masticate is to chew, to reduce to a pulp. It is advisable to masticate slowly and thoroughly, to get the best results from your digestive system.
matriculate: (vb) [muh-trik-yuh-layt] When you matriculate at a college or university, you enroll. From Middle Latin matriculatus (person enlisted), based on matricula (list).
maw: (n) [maw] A maw is a mouth, jaws, throat, gullet, or the stomach of an animal; figuratively, any great opening resembling an animal's jaws. 
mawkish: (adj) [maw-kish] Anything mawkish is cloying, insipidly sentimental. The term can apply to persons as well as things. There is no harm in being sweet and sentimental, but people should stop short of being mawkish. 
megalomania: (n) [meg-uh-low-mayn-ee-uh] This word describes delusions of grandeur, exaggerated ideas of one's own importance. A person suffering from this condition is called a megalomaniac, and is obsessed with the need to do things in a grand manner. 
melange: (n) [may-lonzh] A melange is a mixture or medley. The implication is that the mixture is a "mixed bag" of diverse and heterogeneous elements. Airplane passenger lists consist of melanges of rich and poor, sophisticated and provincial, old and young.
mellifluous: (adj) [muh-lif-loo-us] Mellifluous sounds are sweet and smooth (literally, flowing with honey). The word is usually found in the phrase mellifluous voice, indicating one that is smooth, flowing and sweet.
mendacious: (adj) [men-day-shus] Anything or anyone mendacious is false, lying, untruthful. Once a person has been proved mendacious, it is dangerous ever to trust him in the future. Despite our truth-in-advertising laws, much of what is contained in advertising matter borders on the mendacious.
mendicant: (n) [men-dih-kint] The noun means "beggar"; it can also be used as an adjective to mean "begging." 
mercurial: (adj) [mur-kyoor-ee-ul] This word can mean either "lively and sprightly" or "changeable, fickle, erratic," depending on the context.
meretricious: (adj) [mair-uh-trish-us] This word applies to anyone or anything tawdry and insincere, though showily attractive. It is derived from Latin meretrix (prostitute), so that its literal meaning is "like a prostitute." In its common figurative sense, meretricious expresses dishonest, cheap, flashy allure, like that of a harlot, with no real feeling behind it. 
messianic: (adj) [meh-see-an-ik] This adjective is applied to a leader (or would-be leader) claiming or expected to be a liberator or deliverer; more loosely, to anyone or any theory claiming or expected to solve whatever the crisis of the moment happens to be. Messiah is the name of the deliverer of the Jews promised in the Old Testament. 
metamorphosis: (n) [met-uh-mor-fih-sis] A metamorphosis is a transformation. In Greek, the word formed from meta-, a common prefix denoting change, plus morphe (form). In zoology, it is the term describing changes like caterpillar into butterfly, or tadpole into frog. Its common metaphorical use is to denote transformation generally.
metaphor: (n) [met-uh-for] This is a figure of speech in which a word or phrase is used not literally, but in a way that suggests a comparison of the thing described with something else. In a related figure of speech known as a simile, the comparison is actually made, not merely suggested. The word as or like is used in a simile, never in a metaphor. 
metaphysics: (n) [met-uh-fiz-iks] Metaphysics is philosophy, particularly the abstruse variety. It is a technical term in philosophy, denoting the branch dealing with first principles, the nature of existence and knowledge. Its common use, however, often pejorative, is to characterize an argument or theory as to far-fetched an abstruse to prove the point contended for. 
mete: (vb) [meet] To mete someone out is to distribute or allot it. It is the judge's function to mete out punishment that fairly fits the crime. 
miasma: (n) [my-az-muh] Miasma is, literally, noxious air or unwholesome exhalations, as from a swamp or any rotting matter. More broadly, the word is used to describe a pervasive atmosphere that tends to harm or corrupt, or an emanation of foreboding and decay. 
mien: (n) [meen] Mien is bearing, air, especially as an indication of a person's character or mood. Abraham Lincoln was a man of noble mien. Influenced by the French noun mine [meen] meaning "expression, appearance." 
milieu: (n) [mil-yeuh] This word, taken over intact from the French, means "environment, surroundings." New boys at boarding school often find it difficult to adjust to the new milieu.
militate: (vb) [mil-uh-tayt] To militate is to operate or serve as an important influence in favor of or against something. A number of factors militated against success in our attempt to rescue the Iranian hostages.
minutiae: (n, pl) [mih-noo-shee-ee] The minutiae of anything are its smallest details. A careful lawyer will pay close attention even to the minutiae of his case. From Latin minutiae (plural of minutia, meaning "smallness")
misanthrope: (n) [mis-ihn-throhp] A misanthrope is a people-hater, a person who dislikes just about everybody. Misanthrope and its related words come from Greek misanthropos, formed from misos (hate) plus anthropos (man).
miscreant: (n, adj) [mis-kree-int] A miscreant is a villain; used as an adjective, the word means "villainous." The word has an interesting derivation from the Middle English word meaning unbelieving, the literal, but uncommon use of the word being to describe a heretic or infidel. Since all who did not "believe" in the Middle Ages were considered base and evil, the word soon acquired the meaning "villain," or as an adjective, "villainous." 
misnomer: (n) [mis-noh-mur] A misnomer is a wrong name of something, or in the use of a wrong name. Vegetable is a misnomer for tomato; it is properly classified as a fruit. 
misogyny: (n) [mih-soj-uh-nee] Misogyny is hatred of women. On close inspection, what looks like misogyny turns out to be gynephobia, the abnormal fear of women. 
mitigate: (vb) [mit-uh-gayt] What is mitigated is lessened, made less intense or severe. A convicted criminal's contriteness may sometimes cause a judge to mitigate the sentence.
mnemonic: (n, adj) [nee-mon-ik] A mnemonic, or mnemonic device, is anything that aids memory. "Spring forward, fall back" is a mnemonic that helps people set their clocks properly when daylight savings time starts and ends.
modicum: (n) [mod-ih-kum] A modicum is a bit, a small quantity. The word is commonly found in negative expressions- Some people are hopelessly stupid, without even a modicum of common sense.
molt: (vb) [mowlt] To molt (speaking on animals) is to shed the outer covering (skin, feathers, etc.). Take care when you see the skins of molting rattlesnakes.
morass: (n) [muh-rass] A morass is a marsh or bog; figuratively, anything that bogs you down. 
mordant: (adj) [mor-dint] Mordant means "sarcastic, biting," and is often used in the phrase mordant wit. The Latin word mordere (to bite) produced the French verb mordre, a form of which became the adjective mordant.
moribund: (adj) [mor-ih-bund] The literal meaning of moribund is "approaching death," as in the expression a moribund patient. It is more generally used to depict something that is on the verge of collapsing, "going fast," "on the way out." 
motif: (n) [moh-teef] The theme of a work of art, whether literary, musical or other, is usually called its motif. American tourists in the Caribbean are all too prone to wear shirts decorated with tropical motifs.
mottled: (adj) [mot-uld] This word describes anything splotched with spots of different colors and sizes. The skin of older people is often wrinkled and mottled. The word is formed by "back formation" from motley (of different colors, varied), which came from Middle English and is akin to medley.
mountebank: (n) [mount-uh-bank] A mountebank is a charlatan and swindler. Originally the term was applied to a pitchman hawking quack medicines. We get this word from Italian montinbanco (literally, a person who climbs up on a bench; in Italian, montare is "to climb" and banco means "bench").
mulct: (vb) [mulkt] To mulct someone is to bleed or milk him of something; to mulct something (usually money) is to obtain it by fraud or extortion. There is a rarely seen noun mulct, meaning "fine" or "penalty," and the verb can also mean "to punish ( someone) by fine or forfeiture." This rare usage is found in the Latin origin of the word- multa (a fine) or multare (to punish).
mundane: (adj) [mun-dayn] Anything dull, ordinary, or routine is mundane. You may come across a less common meaning of mundane- "worldly" (as opposed to spiritual). From Latin mundus (world).
munificent: (adj) [myoo-nif-ih-sint] Munificent describes anyone or anything extremely generous, bountiful, lavish. 
nadir: (n) [nay-dur not nay-deer] The nadir of anything is its lowest point. It is a technical term in astronomy, the science from which we also get the word zenith, meaning highest point. Nadir comes from the Arabic word nazir, meaning "opposite" (opposite to the zenith, that is).
nascent: (adj) [nay-sint] Something nascent is just beginning to exist. From Latin nascens, a form of nasci (to be born).
nebulous: (adj) [neb-yuh-lis] Nebulous describes anything hazy, indistinct, foggy (in the figurative sense). From Latin nebulosus (misty, foggy), based on nebula (mist, cloud).
nefarious: (adj) [nuh-fair-ee-us] A nefarious person or deed is wicked, execrable. From Latin nefarius (wicked, abominable), basedon prefix ne- (not; in this case, against) plus fas (divine command).
nemesis: (n) [nem-ih-sis] Someone's nemesis is his downfall or undoing. It can also denote his unbeatable rival. Nemesis was the classical goddess of retribution, so called from the Greek verb nemein, meaning "to dispense (justice)." 
neophyte: (n) [nee-uh-fyte] A neophyte is a beginner. In church circles, a neophyte is the name for a new convert, or a novice in a religious order. From Greek neophytos, based on prefix neo- (new) plus phyton (plant).
nether: (adj) [neth-ur, th and in the] Nether means "lower." This is a rather literary word. The nether world is hell. Nethermost means "lowest." Netherlands are sometimes referred to as "the Low Countries," so known because that country lies lower than sea level.
niggardly: (adj) [nig-urd-lee] Niggardly people are stingy, loath to part with even the smallest contribution; niggardly things are meanly small or scanty. Do not confuse niggardly with niggling.
niggling: (adj) [nig-ling] Niggling (from niggle, to fuss or carp) means "petty." Pedants sometimes make an awful fuss about a niggling, hair-splitting semantic difference. Niggling can also describe details of work requiring excessive effort. Do not confuse niggling with niggardly.
nihilism: (n) [ny-uh-liz-um] Nihilism is a philosophy that preaches the total rejection of all restraint, all laws, all social and political institutions. A person embracing this creed is a nihilist. 
nirvana: (n) [nir-vah-nuh] Nirvana is perfect bliss, the state of freedom from all the pain and suffering in the world. In Eastern religion, nirvana is the name of the state attained through the extinction of one's personal passions and delusions. In general, nirvana means "perfect peace, heavenly bliss." 
nomenclature: (n) [noh-min-klay-chur] Nomenclature is a system of names such as those used in a particular branch of science, philosophy, art, etc. 
non sequitur: (n) [non-seh-kwih-tur] This Latin phrase meaning "it does not follow," often abbreviated as non seq., is used as a noun describing an unwarranted, unsupported conclusion, a statement made as though logically connected to what has gone before, but which in reality has nothing to do with it. Non sequiturs are a specialty of politicians answering questions at press conferences.
nostrum: (n) [nahs-trum] A nostrum is a quack medicine; by extension, a panacea, a pet scheme recommended for the cure of the ills of the world. Nostrum means "our" in Latin, and evokes the image of the pitchman selling "our" drug. Political hacks have a nostrum available for any social problem that crops up.
noxious: (adj) [nok-shus] Anything noxious is harmful, physically or morally. We must be on guard against the noxious teachings of both Communism and Fascism.
nuance: (n) [nyoo-ahns'] A nuance is a shade of meaning, a delicate gradation, a subtle difference in expression, feeling, color, etc. It is not enough to know the basic meaning of a word; it is important to recognize the nuance imparted by the context. 
nubile: (adj) [nyoo-bil] This adjective applies only to girls and young women and means "marriageable, ready for marriage." Lolita, the heroine of the novel of that name by Vladimir Nabokov, was nubile at a tender age, and the perfect embodiment of the sexually alluring nymphet. From Latin nubilis (marriageable), based on nubere (to marry).
nugatory: (adj) [nyoo-guh-tor-ee] What is nugatory is worthless, ineffective, futile. At times, our government seems to be taking entirely nugatory steps to remedy the economic situation. 
obdurate: (adj) [ahb-dyoo-rit] An obdurate person is unyielding, inflexible, persistent, especially in the context of resistance to attempts at moral uplifting, as an obdurate old rascal or sinner. 
obeisance: (n) [oh-bay-since] Obeisance is homage, deep respect; literally, a bow or curtsy showing deference to a superior. To make one's obeisance is to make a gesture of deep respect. In general it indicates deserved respect of deference. Obeisance is a French word meaning "obedience," and by extension, "submission," based on the verb obeir (to obey).
obfuscate: (vb) [ahb-fus-kayt] To obfuscate something is to make it obscure, to becloud it. Devious people resort to obfuscation in order to evade the issue. From Late Latin obfuscatus, a form of obfuscare (to darken), basedon Latin fuscus (dark, and by extension, distinct).
oblivion: (n) [uh-bliv-ee-un] This word can have either an active meaning, describing the state of forgetting, or having forgotten, being unaware; or a passive meaning, describing the state of being forgotten. There is a related adjective oblivious (unmindful). 
obloquy: (n) [ahb-luh-kwee] Obloquy is disgrace and bad repute resulting from public discredit or denunciation. Benedict Arnold has always borne the obloquy of the condemned traitor. Obloquy can also be used in the sense of "censure." Obloquy is derived from Latin obloqui (to speak against).
obscurantism: (n) [ahb-skyoor-in-tiz-im] Obscurantism is the deliberate avoidance of clarity. Recalcitrant witnesses who indulge in excessive obscurantism may find themselves held in contempt of court. 
obsequious: (adj) [ub-see-kwee-us] An obsequious person or gesture is excessively deferential and sickeningly servile. From Latin obsequiosus (yielding) based on the verb obsequi (to comply with). Do not confuse obsequious with obsequies, meaning "funeral services." The word obsequies and its meaning came about by accident.
obstreperous: (adj) [ub-strep-uh-rus] Obstreperous people are unruly and boisterous. The term may also be applied to their conduct. Dinner parties can be ruined by the obstreperous interruptions of the host's children.
obtrude: (vb) [ub-trood] To obtrude is to force (something, or oneself) on others. One can become unpopular by regularly obtruding his opinions on the people around him. The adjective describing such an action is obtrusive, which describes people who obtrude themselves (and their opinions) on others, and can be used to mean "disagreeably noticeable." 
obtuse: (adj) [ub-toos] An obtuse person is slow-witted, insensitive, thick-skinned, and thick-headed. You have to be explicit with some people who are too obtuse to take a hint. 
obviate: (vb) [ahb-vee-ayt] To obviate something is to make it unnecessary, to make it possible to do without it. Obviate is often followed by "the necessity of." This usage would appear to be tautological, since obviate has built into it the concept of rendering unnecessary.
occlude: (vb) [uh-klood] Anything occluded is closed, stopped up. A clot occluding a coronary artery can be fatal. The noun is occlusion. 
odious: (adj) [oh-dee-us] Odious means "hateful." From Latin odiosus (hateful), based on the verb odi (to hate).
offal: (n) [aw-ful] Literally, offal is the term applied to the parts of a butchered animal considered inedible waste. By extension, it has become a term for refuse or garbage in general. The word can apply, figuratively, to people considered outcasts. From Middle English predecessors of off and fall- things that fall off.
Olympian: (adj) [oh-lim-pee-in] Anything Olympian is majestic, incomparable, lofty. Olympus is the name of a mountain in Greece, the supposed home of the greater Greek gods. By extension, Olympian became applicable to anyone or anything incomparably superior. 
ombudsman: (n) [om-boodz-min] This is the term for an official appointed to look into complains by individuals against public bodies and authorities. It is a Swedish word meaning "commissioner," taken over into English for this specific purpose.
omniscient: (adj) [ahm-nish-int] This is the adjective that describes people who know everything. Based on Latin omnis (all), plus sciens, a form of scire (to know). 
onerous: (adj) [awn-ur-us] Anything onerous is burdensome. 
onomatopoetic, onomatopoeic: (adj) [on-uh-mat-uh-poh-et-ik, on-uh-mat-uh-pee-ik] This term describes words that sound like what they mean, like boom, sizzle, cuckoo, buzz, hiss. 
opprobrium: (n) [uh-proh-bree-um] This word describes disgrace or infamy suffered as a result of shameful conduct. The adjective opprobrious means "disgraceful" in a phrase like opprobrious behavior, but in expressions like opprobrious language and opprobrious invective it means "abusive, scornful," i.e., expressive for emphatic reproach, rather than itself being shameful. 
ordure: (n) [or-jur] Ordure is dung, excrement; by extension, anything disgusting or degrading. Some pornographic publications are replete with ordure depicting the most depraved and disgusting acts and concepts.
ostensible: (adj) [ah-sten-suh-bul] This adjective applies to things that are pretended, put forward as the reason for something, apparent but not real. Something ostensible offers plausibility while concealing the reality of the situation. 
ostentatious: (adj) [ahs-ten-tay-shus] Anything ostentatious is showy and intended to impress. The ostentatious display of finery and outrageously expensive jewels by the aristocracy played a part in fomenting the French Revolution. 
ostracize: (vb) [ahs-truh-syz] When you ostracize someone, you exclude him from society or companionship. The act is called ostracism. The word arose from the Greek ostrakon, a potsherd (fragment of broken pottery) or tile-marked and used as a ballot.
otiose: (adj) [oh-shee-ohs] This word can mean either "idle, at leisure" or "futile, useless," depending on the context. The first use is the most common- A person with a good pension can spend his retirement years in otiose comfort. From Latin otiosus (at leisure), based on otium (leisure).
paean: (n) [pee-in] A paean is a song of praise, a shot of exultation, and by extension, any lavish expression of praise or joy. Paean, Homer tells us, was the name of a god serving as physician to the other gods, who was later identified as Apollo. They hymn to Apollo began with the words Io Paean (Oh, Paean); that phrase was later used in hymns of thanksgiving to any god, and thus paean came to signify any song of praise, triumph, or thanksgiving.
palliative: (n) [pal-ee-uh-tiv] A palliative relieves without cursing. To palliate is to extenuate, lessen, de-emphasize. Palliative is often used pejoratively, to indicate that the thing so characterized is not really "doing the job." 
pallid: (adj) [pahl-id] One who is pallid is pale and wan; by extension, dull, lacking vitality or sparkle. The word can apply to things as well as people. Pallor is the noun, describing paleness caused by fear or sickness, or even death. 
palpable: (adj) [pal-puh-bul] Anything palpable is easily perceived, obvious. The word is usually applied to negative things like lies and absurdities. 
panacea: (n) [pan-uh-see-uh] A panacea is a cure-all. Panacea was the Greek goddess of healing, one of the gods named in the Hippocratic oath taken by prospective doctors. Her name became a common noun in Latin for a fabulous plant, supposed to heal all diseases, and, by extension, any cure-all, and was taken into English as a universal remedy.
panache: (n) [puh-nash] Panache is verve, flair, style, dash. Panache was the name given to a tuft, usually of feathers, attached to a helmet in days of chivalry. From this it came to mean "dash, verve, flamboyance" in manner. To have panache is to have an air about you. 
panegyric: (n) [pan-uh-jeer-ik] A panegyric is a speech or article in praise of someone or something. Panegyris, in ancient Greece, meant "public assembly" or "festival" (at which laudatory orations were given).
panoply: (n) [pan-uh-plee not pan-op-uh-lee] A panoply is a complete magnificent outfit, a splendid display. Panoply originally meant a "full suit of armor," from Greek panoplia, and the term became broadened to include any ceremonial outfit. By extension, it is used figuratively to describe any glittering covering, as in a panoply of colorful autumn leaves. 
pantheon: (n) [pan-thee-ahn] This word describes a preeminent group, those most highly esteemed. Originally, it was the term for a temple dedicated to all the gods, from Greek pan (all) and theos (god). It came to include any public building housing the remains of a nation's illustrious heroes. 
paradox: (n) [par-uh-dox] Any self-contradictory statement or contradiction in terms qualifies as a paradox. It has been said that the brain paradoxically lacks the power to understand itself. 
paragon: (n) [par-uh-gon] A paragon is a model of excellence, an ideal example of something. A paragon is perfection personified, whatever the particular virtue may be. 
parameter: (n) [puh-ram-ih-tur] This is not only a highly technical term used in mathematics, statistics, and other sciences, far too complex for definition here, but it is important not to employ it in the general use, the way it is usually misused as the result of confusion with the word perimeter.
pariah: (n) [puh-ry-uh] A pariah is an outcast, a person rejected by society or his immediate circle. The word comes from Tamil (on e of the many Indian languages) paraiyan (drummer). The connection is that pariah denotes a member of a low Indian caste of which drumming was a hereditary duty. 
parlous: (adj) [par-lus] Parlous is a rather self-conscious literary word, which appears to be only a tongue-in-cheek substitute for perilous. In fact, it is a Middle English variant of perlous, from which we get perilous. 
parochial: (adj) [puh-roh-kee-ul] This word is akin to provincial, in describing people and outlooks that are narrow, restricted. A special use is seen in the term parochial school, an institution maintained by a religious organization. This use stems from the literal meaning of parochial, "pertaining to a parish." 
paroxysm: (n) [par-ik-siz-im] A paroxysm is a violent outburst. On hearing bad news, Hitler would become convulsed in a paroxysm of rage. From Greek paroxysmos (irritation). 
parsimonious: (adj) [par-sih-moh-nee-us] Parsimonious people are stingy, niggardly. Parsimony is the noun. Parsimonious folk tend to look the other way when the collection plate comes around on Saturday morning. This word implies excessive frugality, and is clearly pejorative. Sensible people are thrifty, misers are parsimonious.
parvenu: (n, adj) [par-vuh-nyoo] A parvenu is an upstart; a person of obscure origin who has recently acquired wealth or position, but not the manners, style, wardrobe, etc., that go with it. If parvenu, whether as noun or adjective, refers to a woman, it should be spelled parvenue, as it would in French. 
pastiche: (n) [puh-steesh] This word describes an artistic work made up of borrowings from variegated source material, a hodgepodge. By extension, the word can mean "hodgepodge" generally, a mishmash, somewhat akin to potpourri [poe-poo-ree not pot-pour-ee].
pastoral: (adj) [pas-tuh-rul] This word means "rustic, bucolic." Latin pastor gave us or word for minister of a church, and evokes the idyllic charm and serenity of a shepard's life. In a narrower sense, it refers to church ministers.
patent: (adj) [pat-int] What is patent is obvious, exposed to view. Excessive coughing and shuffling of feet indicate an audience's patent impatience or disagreement with the speaker's message. 
pathological: (adj) [path-uh-loj-ik-ul] This word means "caused by disease." The noun from which it comes, pathology, is a general term for the study of diseases. The adjective, pathological, covers any condition caused by disease, whether of mind or body. 
pathos: (n) [pay-thahs not pay-thohs] Pathos is the quality in human experience or any art form that evokes compassion. From Greek pathos (suffering).
patrician: (n, adj) [puh-trish-in] A patrician is an aristocrat; as an adjective patrician means "aristocratic, highborn," and by extension, "characteristic of aristocrats."
paucity: (n) [paw-sih-tee] Paucity is a scarcity, poor supply. The people are becoming more and more disillusioned about the wisdom of the government because of the paucity of talent visible in high places. 
peccadillo: (n) [pek-uh-dil-oh] This is a pleasant word for a petty offense or trivial fault. We're only human; we all have our peccadilloes. In Spanish, peccadillo is a small sin, a slight fault.
pecuniary: (adj) [puh-kyoo-nee-air-ee] Pecuniary describes anything pertaining to money. Some offenses carry a jail sentence, others a pecuniary fine, still others either or both. 
pedagogue: (n) [ped-uh-gahg] Literally, a pedagogue is simply a schoolteacher, but its use implies that the person in question employs pedantic or dogmatic methods. From Greek paidagogos (boy's tutor).
pedant: (n) [ped-int] A pedant is a person who shows off his learning, a nitpicker who insists a strict adherence to formal rules and overemphasizes minor details, an obsessive stickler. Pedantry is the activity of pedants; pedantic is the adjective describing pedants. A pedant is more interested in displaying his learning than in explaining or instructing. 
pedestrian: (adj) [puh-dehs-tree-in] We are familiar with this word as a noun describing a person going on foot. The adjective means "commonplace, dull, unimaginative." The concept of going on foot is extended, in the figurative use of the adjective to "plodding." 
pejorative: (adj, n) [puh-jor-uh-tiv] As an adjective, this word means "disparaging, belittling"; as a noun, it covers any word or expression that disparages, belittles, talks down, puts down, badmouths someone or something. 
penchant: (n) [pen-chint] A penchant is an inclination, strong liking. This word, taken over intact from the French, is based on the French verb pencher (to lean).
penultimate: (adj) [pih-null-tih-mit] Penultimate means "next to last." The penult [pee-nult] of a word is its next to last syllable, like the -ta- in fantasy. Penultimate can be applied to anything in a sequence. 
penurious: (adj) [puh-nyoor-ee-us] This word must be used carefully, for it can apply in two entirely different ways, to mean "stingy, parsimonious," or "destitute, poverty stricken." Penury stresses destitution, and penuriousness stresses stinginess.
peregrination: (n) [perr-uh-grih-nay-shin] Peregrination means "travelling" or "journey." This word is usually found in the plural. A related adjective, peregrine, which means foreign, is not in common use.
peremptory: (adj) [pur-emp-tuh-ree] A peremptory order or command is one that is imperious, dictatorial, admitting of no discussion. Some wives used to carry out their husbands' peremptory instructions with slavish compliance.
perfidious: (adj) [pur-fid-ee-us] A perfidious person is faithless, disloyal, treacherous. Perfidy is the noun. From Latin per (through, in the sense of "beyond the limits of") plus fides (faith).
perfunctory: (adj) [pur-fungk-tuh-ree] This word describes anything done routinely, as a duty, without interest or enthusiasm. 
peripatetic: (adj) [pehr-uh-puh-tet-ik] People who travel about from place to place are said to be peripatetic. This word came from a description given to Aristotle (384 - 322 B.C.), who taught philosophy while walking about in the colonnade in the Lyceum of Athens, called the "peripatos." 
peripheral: (adj) [puh-riff-uh-rul] This word describes anything touching upon the incidental rather than the essential aspects of a subject. In any argument, it is important to keep to the point and not to harp on peripheral matters. 
pernicious: (adj) [pur-nish-us] What is pernicious is very injurious. Communism and Fascism are both pernicious doctrines. From Latin perniciosus (destructive, ruinous).
peroration: (n) [pair-uh-ray-shin] A peroration is the conclusion of a discourse, consisting of a summing up of the main points and a moving final statement urging acceptance of the argument. In murder cases, both the prosecution and the defense usually wind up with fiery perorations. 
perquisite: (n) [pur-kwih-zit] If you are getting a perquisite, you are enjoying a fringe benefit, an allowance or other right incidental and additional to your salary. Perquisite is often shortened to perk, sometimes perq. 
persiflage: (n) [pur-sih-flahzh] Persiflage is banter, a flippant, light-hearted way of dealing with a subject. Witty persiflage can be a big help to the hostess at a dinner party. Adopted intact from the French, who based it on their verb siffler (to whistle).
persona: (n) [pur-soh-nuh] One's persona is his social facade, the "front" he presents to the world at large, as opposed to his real self. The meaning and effect of this word is seen from its meaning in Latin- "mask." 
perspicacious: (adj) [pur-spih-kay-shis] A perspicacious person is discerning, gifted with keen insight. A lawyer must be perspicacious in order to seize upon the relevant issues and brush aside the peripheral ones.
peruse: (vb) [puh-rooz] To peruse something is to read it through carefully, to go over every word of it. For some reason, many mistakenly believe that peruse means somewhat the opposite, to "skin through." Per-, as a prefix, implies thoroughness (as in persist, persevere, etc.). Perusal is the noun.
pervasive: (adj) [pur-vay-siv] Pervasive means "spread about." The verb is pervade. Dull guests can fill a house with pervasive boredom for an entire weekend.
petulant: (adj) [peh-chuh-lint] A petulant person is unjustifiably impatient, prone to irritation over trifles, easily annoyed. Petulance is the noun. There are those difficult ones who meet the slightest interruption with petulance and annoyance.
philistine: (n, adj) [fil-ihs-teen] A philistine is a lowbrow, one who not only lacks culture and is smugly indifferent to it, but tends to attack it. A philistine mistrusts any sign of culture in others. 
phlegmatic: (adj) [fleg-mat-ik] If you are phlegmatic, you are apathetic, sluggish, slow to be aroused or excited. Phlegm, from Greek, is the thick mucus secreted in the respiratory passages, which was believed, in the old days, to cause apathy and sluggishness. 
piquant: (adj) [pee-kint] Pertaining to food, this word conveys the sense of pleasant sharpness in taste. In a more general sense, piquant means "agreeably provocative and stimulating, titillating." A woman's piquant smile and manners can charm a roomful of people. Piquant is taken over intact from the French, where it is a form of the verb piquer (to prick, sting).
pithy: (adj) [pith-ee] Anything pithy is succinct, meaty, full of substance. Pith is the noun, meaning the "heart" or "essential part" of something, as in the pith of the matter. Pithy comes from a variety of Middle English, Dutch, etc., words meaning "pit" (of a fruit).
placate: (vb) [play-kayt] When you placate someone, you appease, pacify, mollify him. From Latin placatus, a form of placare (to soothe).
placebo: (n) [pluh-see-boh] This is the name given to a substance prescribed by a doctor as though it were medicine, which in fact has no medicinal effect, and is usually given in a controlled experiment to test a real medicine. Placebo is the first person singular, future tense of the Latin verb placere (to please) and means "I shall please." 
placid: (adj) [plas-id] Placid people and things are calm, serene, tranquil. Placid people are not easily upset. From Latin placidus (quiet, gentle, still).
plaintive: (adj) [plain-tiv] Anything that expresses sorrow, grief, or melancholy, or sounds sorrowful, may be described as plaintive. From Latin planctus (breast-beating, lamentation), which is also a form of Latin plangere (to bewail).
plangent: (adj) [plan-jint] Plangent describes anything that resounds in a mournful way. Village church bells summoning mourners create a plangent sound that reminds us of the mortality of all men. From Latin plangere (literally, to beat, and by extension, to beat the breast, to bewail).
platitude: (n) [plat-uh-tyood] A platitude is a trite remark. This term applies especially to observations pronounced solemnly, as though they were profound truths newly discovered and being uttered for the first time. 
plaudits: (n, pl) [plaw-dits] Plaudits are applause and, by extension, any enthusiastic demonstration of approval. A hostess is always delighted when her dinner earns the plaudits of her guests. 
plethora: (n) [pleth-uh-ruh not pluh-thor-uh] A plethora of anything is an overabundance or an excess of it, and is usually used in a situation when something or other is "too much of a good thing." 
poignant: (adj) [poin-yint] Poignant means "moving," in the sense of "very touching." The loyalty of a dog to his master is always a poignant sight. Taken over intact from the French.
polemic: (n, adj) [puh-lem-ik] A polemic is a verbal attack on a doctrine, belief, opinion. Polemics, with an s but still treated as a singular (like physics or economics), is the art of argument or controversy. Polemic, as an adjective, means "argumentative." From Greek polemikos (pertaining to war).
polyglot: (n, adj) [pahl-ee-glot] A polyglot is a person with a command of a number of languages. As an adjective, polyglot means "multilingual," and can describe a person (one who knows several languages) or book or other piece of writing. From Greek polyglottos (many-tongued).
ponderous: (adj) [pahn-dur-us] Ponderous can be used in either of two ways- it can apply to anything heavy or unwieldy, or to things like speeches and writings that are labored. From Latin pondus (weight).
pontificate: (vb) [pon-tif-ih-kayt] To pontificate is to speak pompously, hold forth in a dogmatic way. Pontifex is Latin for "high priest"; to pontificate is to "speak like a high priest," i.e., speak pompously or dogmatically or both. Pontiff is another word for pope. 
portend: (vb) [por-tend] To portend is to foreshadow. The discontented murmurings of an audience portend the rejection of a speaker's proposal. A related word is portent, meaning "omen." Portentous means "momentous" or "ominously significant." 
portmanteau: (n) [port-man-toe] A portmanteau is a travelling bag of a special sort. It is a chiefly British word describing especially the kind of trunk or suitcase that opens into two halves. It has a special use, indicating a word that results from the blending of two other words, like brunch. 
postulate: (vb) [pahs-chu-layt] When you postulate something, you assume it to be true. In their reasoning, those against the building of nuclear power stations postulate that the inherent danger will inevitably cause enormous loss of life. From Latin postulare (to claim).
potter: (vb) [paht-ur] To potter is to keep busy aimlessly. Pottering in the garden on a sunny day is a pleasant way to spend time whether or not the actual results are rewarding.
pragmatic: (adj) [prag-mat-ik] Pragmatic activities, especially approaches, deal with situations from a practical point of view. Pragmatism is the mode of thought that puts the emphasis on practical considerations; the matter-of-fact and cause-and-effect approach. 
prate: (vb) [prayt] To prate is to babble, to talk too much. Gossips delight in prating about one trivial happening after another.
prattle: (n, vb) [prat-ul] To prattle is to babble, chatter away. Prattle can be used as a noun to indicate prattling or a repetition in sound. Cognate with prate.
precipitate: (adj, vb) [prih-sip-ih-tit, prih-sip-ih-tayt] As an adjective, this word has a number of meanings- "headlong," "hasty," "sudden," and "rash." The verb to precipitate means "to hasten, bring about prematurely." Do not confuse precipitate with precipitous. 
precipitous: (adj) [prih-sip-ih-tus] Precipitous means "very steep." Old fashioned houses often have precipitous staircases. Do not confuse precipitous with precipitate. 
precursor: (n) [pree-kur-sur] This word can be used to mean "predecessor, forerunner," or "harbinger" (in the sense of "signal of approach"), depending on the context. 
predilection: (n) [pred-uh-lek-shun] A predilection for something is a liking or preference for it. The word is based on Latin dilectus (choosing).
preen: (vb) [preen] This word can be understood in either the sense of "primping, grooming (oneself)" or "priding, congratulating (oneself)." In the animal world, preen is the word used for "grooming" (dressing fur or feathers with the tongue or beak).
prehensile: (adj) [pree-hen-sul] This word applies to an animal's appendage which is capable of grasping an object. Elephants have prehensile trunks; monkeys have prehensile tails.
presage: (n, vb) [preh-sij not pre-say'g] A presage is an omen, anything that foreshadows a coming event. As a verb, presage is to foreshadow, portend. 
prescience: (n) [presh-ee-ints] Prescience is foreknowledge. An experienced lawyer has a good deal of prescience about the course of a lawsuit. Prescient is the adjective. Seers are prescient. 
presentiment: (n) [prih-zent-uh-mint not pre-sent-ih-mint] A presentiment is a feeling that something is about to happen, with the implication that the something is bad or evil; a foreboding. Some people, with nothing to base it on, have cancelled their plane reservations because of a presentiment that the flight was ill-fated. 
prestidigitator: (n) [pres-tuh-dij-ih-tay-tur] Prestidigitators are magicians, especially those practicing sleight of hand. The word can be used figuratively, to indicate great or surprising skill. 
prevaricate: (vb) [prih-var-ih-kayt] One shouldn't prevaricate- it means "to lie," or at least "to speak evasively." This word covers the making of equivocal or evasive statements for the purpose of misleading. 
priapic: (adj) [pry-ap-ik not pry-uh-pik] This word, derived from the god Priapus of Greek mythology, describes anyone or anything over-concerned with male sexuality. Priapus was the god of masculine reproductive power, and become the chief deity of lewdness and the personification of the male erection. 
primogeniture: (n) [pry-muh-jen-ih-chur] This is a system of inheritance under which the eldest son inherited all real property left by his parents, but if there were no sons, the eldest most closely related male inherited everything. From Late Latin primogenitura (first birth).
primordial: (adj) [pry-mor-dee-ul] Primordial means "primeval, first to exist." From Latin primordium (first beginning, origin).
privation: (n) [pry-vay-shin] One suffering from privation lacks the necessities of life. Do not confuse privation with deprivation, which describes the act of withholding something from someone, or taking it away forcibly. 
privy: (adj) [prih-vee] To be privy to something is to participate in the knowledge of something kept secret from the rest. Only good and trusted friends should be made privy to information you want to keep from the world at large. From Latin privatus (private).
probity: (n) [proh-bih-tee] Probity is honesty, integrity. Judicial opinions should reflect intellectual probity. From Latin probitas (uprightness, honesty).
proclivity: (n) [proh-kliv-ih-tee] A proclivity toward something is an inclination, tendency or proneness to it. Creative work in the sciences benefits from one's proclivity to painstaking research. From Latin proclivitas (literally, slope; by extension, inclination).
procreate: (vb) [proh-kree-ayt] To procreate is to beget (offspring), to generate. Procreant is the adjective, describing the ability or tendency to procreate.
prodigal: (n, adj) [prod-ih-gul] Prodigal (the adjective) has a number of different meanings. First, "recklessly extravagant, wasteful." Next, "lavish." Finally, "profuse, abundant." As a noun, it means "one who is prodigal." 
prodigious: (adj) [pruh-dij-us not pro-dij-ee-us] This word can mean either "enormous" or "amazing, marvelous," depending on the context. The related noun prodigy can mean an amazing or wonderful example, but is most common use is to describe a person (usually a young person) endowed with an extraordinary gift. 
profane: (vb, adj) [pruh-fayn] As a verb, profane means "defile." As an adjective, profane can mean either "secular" (as opposed to sacred) or "blasphemous, irreverent," depending on the context. The adjective comes from Latin profanus, a combination of pro (in front i.e., outside) and fanum (temple); outside a temple, hence, not sacred, therefore profane, in the sense of "secular." 
profligate: (n, adj) [prof-lih-git] This word, as an adjective, has two separate meanings- "utterly immoral" and "recklessly extravagant." From Latin profligatus (ruined, degraded). The two distinct meanings of profligate surely reflect the puritan attitude the reckless spending is in itself immoral. 
prognosticate: (vb) [prog-nahs-tih-kayt] To prognosticate is to forecast. Prognosis is a related word, meaning "forecast, prediction." Its most frequent use is in medicine- the doctor's prognosis is his forecast of the probably course of a disease.
proliferate: (vb) [pro-lif-ur-ayt] To proliferate is to multiply, spread; literally, to grow by multiplication in parts; figuratively, to expand. The related adjective prolific describes anyone or anything producing great quantities, such as a prolific apple tree. 
prolix: (adj) [pro-licks] Prolix people or writings are wordy and tedious, long-winded. Prolix speakers, far from exciting their audiences, tend to put them to sleep. From Latin prolixus (widely extended).
prone: (adj) [prone] Prone can be used in its literal sense of "lying face downward" (the opposite of supine), or in its figurative sense of "inclined, disposed." Non-achievers are prone to envy and rationalization. From Latin pronus (inclined forward).
propensity: (n) [pruh-pen-sih-tee] A propensity to something is an inclination or tendency to it. This word is used, for the most part, in connection with the less desirable traits. 
prophylactic: (n, adj) [pro-fuh-lak-tik] As an adjective, prophylactic means "preventative," and is descriptive of anything that prevents disease, like a medication. Vaccination is prophylactic in the sense of entirely circumventing an affliction. As a noun it applies generally to any preventive, but has a special use as a synonym for condom. 
propinquity: (n) [pruh-pingk-wih-tee] Propinquity is nearness, whether in space or time. The propinquity of events can make them look like cause and effect when there is no casual relationship between them.
propitious: (adj) [pruh-pish-us] Things that are propitious to or for something are favorable to it. Before setting out on a journey, it is a good idea to find out whether the weather report seems propitious. The related verb to propitiate means "to make favorable," i.e., "to appease." 
proprietary: (adj) [pruh-pry-uh-tair-ee] In its general use, this adjective has to do with ownership. A proprietary interest denotes ownership of the whole or a part of something. A proprietary feeling is a feeling of ownership.
prosaic: (adj) [pro-zay-ik] Prosaic means "commonplace." This word describes people and things that are dull, uninspired, and uninspiring, humdrum, run of the mill, as opposed to poetic, a usage based on the assumption that prose, in general, is less inspired or romantic than poetry. 
proselytize: (vb) [prahs-ul-ih-tyz] To proselytize is to convert (someone) to a new religion, political party, school of thought, etc.; in this sense, to recruit. A person so converted is a proselyte. 
protean: (adj) [pro-tee-in] This interesting word, in its literal sense, describes one who is capable of quickly assuming many different forms; figuratively, it means "versatile." Proteus, in ancient Greek legends, was herdsman to the god Neptune. He was an old prophet, able to take on different shapes at will. Hence the adjective protean, meaning "ever-changing, variable, versatile." 
protracted: (adj) [pro-trak-tid] To protract is to prolong, extend, and a protracted meeting or session is one that takes a long time. The most glaring example possible of a protracted speech is a filibuster in Congress or the Senate. Protracted implies extensive prolongation.
proviso: (n) [pruh-vy-zoh] A proviso is a reservation, like a clause (usually in a written document, such as a contract or a warranty) that establishes a limiting condition. The word provision covers any clause; proviso usually sets up a special condition that somehow restricts the operation of another provision. Many contracts contain the proviso that there will be no liability for failure to perform in the event of war. 
prowess: (n) [prow-ihs] Prowess is exceptional ability or great daring. The common use is to denote great ability. 
prurient: (adj) [proor-ee-int] Prurient people are those who have, or are easily susceptible to, lewd thoughts. Prurient people look for a sex angle in every situation. From Latin pruriens, a form of prurire (to itch, long for, be lustful).
puckish: (adj) [puck-ish] A puckish person is impish, mischievous, whimsical. Puck came from the common noun puck, now almost never used, meaning "mischievous sprite, imp, hobgoblin." A woman's puckish little crinkled smile can break a man's heart even if she isn't a raving beauty. 
puerile: (adj) [pyoor-il] People who are childish, immature, and silly qualify for this pejorative adjective. From Latin puerilis (boyish, childish, silly), based on puer (boy).
pugnacious: (adj) [pug-nay-shis] Pugnacious people are belligerent, always ready for a fight, quarrelsome. Base don Latin pugna (battle).
pulchritude: (n) [pul-krih-tood] Pulchritude is beauty, found often in the phrase feminine pulchritude. From Latin pulchritudo (beauty, excellence), based on pulcher (beautiful).
pummel: (vb) [pum-ul] When you pummel someone, you beat him with your fists. Pomum is Latin for "fruit," which gave rise to Vulgar Latin pomellum (ball); that was shortened to pommel as the name of a ball on the hilt of a sword. When you beat someone with the pommel of your sword, you pommeled him. When swords became less common, it referred to beating your opponent with your fists and gave way to the variant pummel. 
punctilious: (adj) [pungk-til-ee-us] A punctilious person is one who is extremely strict in observing all the formalities and generally attentive and conscientious. Origin comes from Latin punctum (point).
pundit: (n) [pun-dit] This is the name given to an expert, an authority on a subject, especially one given to holding forth and making authoritative pronouncements. Pundit is often used in a semi-jocular, semi-pejorative sense, implying that critics and "experts" are not the source of all wisdom. Pundit is taken over from Hindi pandit (learned, or learned man).
purgative: (n, adj) [pur-gih-tiv] Purgative, as an adjective, means "cleansing," especially of the bowels; as a noun, a "cathartic" or "laxative," or any medicine that has that effect. From Latin purgare (to clean, cleanse), based in turn on purus (clean, pure).
purloin: (vb) [pur-loin] To purloin is to steal or filch. Purloin implies misappropriation, a breach of trust. 
pusillanimous: (adj) [pyoo-sih-lan-ih-mus] A pusillanimous person is cowardly, timid, afraid of his own shadow. From Late Latin pusillanimis (mean-spirited), based on Latin pusillus (tiny, puny) plus animus (spirit).
putative: (adj) [pyoo-tuh-tiv] Putative is the equivalent of "thought to be, generally regarded as, supposed." 
quaff: (vb) [kwahf] To quaff is to drink heartily, in long drafts (like those virile men in the beer commercials). At some dinner parties, toast after toast is an excuse for quaffing one drink after another. Quaff implies that what is quaffed is intoxicating liquor. 
quagmire: (n) [kwag-mire] A quagmire is, literally, a bog or marsh; figuratively, any situation from which it is difficult to extricate oneself. 
quail: (vb) [kwale] To quail is to flinch or to cower. The strongest courtiers quailed before the wrath of Queen Elizabeth I. In Victorian tales about harsh treatment at schools and orphanages, the pupils or inmates always quail as the schoolmaster or orphanage owner enters the room.
qualm: (n) [kwahm] This word can mean either "a pang of conscience" or a "misgiving," depending on the context. In the first sense it is used in the plural in a negative way- Some people can just sit there and fabricate an entire story, with no qualms about the possible effects of a lie. Meaning "misgiving"- one sometimes feels a sudden qualm about having entered into a marriage that seemed so encouraging at first.
quandary: (n) [kwon-dree] This is another word for "dilemma," and is an apt way to describe any state of perplexity. When a company is losing money, the owners face the quandary about shutting down and putting faithful old works out of their jobs or continuing in the red. 
quarry: (n) [kwahr-ee] Literally, quarry describes a hunted animal, fish, flesh or fowl. In nature, predators are engaged in a never-ending search for quarry.
quash: (vb) [kwahsh] In the legal sense, to quash is to annul. Convictions are sometimes quashed in the appeals court. In a more general sense, quash is to suppress or quell. From Latin quassare (to shatter).
quaver: (vb) [kway-vur] This word has three distinct meanings. First; "to tremble." Next, "to sing or speak tremendously." Finally in music, "to trill." 
quay: (n) [kee] A quay is a wharf. Quay was formerly spelled key and is still pronounced that way. A quay is a strengthened bank or man-made stretch of stone along a waterway for the loading and unloading of ships. 
quell: (vb) [kwel] This word can mean either "to suppress" or "to allay, to quiet," depending on the context. Based on Old English cwellen (to kill).
querulous: (adj) [kwehr-uh-lus] Querulous people are unpleasant company, because querulous means "complaining, grumbling." 
query: (n, vb) [kwir-ee] As a noun, query can mean either "question" or "mental reservation." As a verb, query can mean "to enquire about" or "to raise a doubt or question about; to challenge as obscure or doubtful," or "to put question to, to question directly." 
queue: (n, vb) [kyoo] Queue, as a noun, denotes a line of people waiting to take their turn. To queue is to form a line while waiting turn. Queue is taken over intact from the French, where it means literally "tail." 
quiescent: (adj) [kwy-ess-int] When things are quiescent they are at rest, inactive. As old age develops, both mind and body grow quiescent (or should). 
quintessence: (n) [kwin-tes-ince] Depending on the context, this word can denote either "the essential part" of something or its "embodiment." The quintessence of Darwin's theory is the survival of the fittest. The devil is the quintessence of evil. 
quixotic: (adj) [kwik-sot-ik] Quixotic, meaning "impractical, visionary," is one of those adjectives formed from the name of a character in legend, literature, or history; in this case, Don Quixote, the super-chivalrous and idealistic but totally impractical hero of the novel of that name by Miguel de Cervantes. 
quizzical: (adj) [kwiz-ih-kul] A quizzical look or expression is one that indicates gentle amusement; somewhat puzzled, marked by a bantering air and a degree of mockery; perhaps derisively questioning; usually whimsical. 
raconteur: (n) [rak-on-tur] A raconteur is a skilled teller of anecdotes, an interesting storyteller. A skillful raconteur is a welcome guest at any gathering. If the person in question is female, the word becomes raconteuse. 
raffish: (adj) [raf-ish] Raffish is an unpleasant word, describing people who are low-class, crude, rakish, disreputable. From raff, part of riff-raff, which is from Middle English rif and raff (things of little value).
rake: (n) [rayk] A rake is a dissolute person. The adjective rakish has none of the pejorative quality of the noun rake. It is much more innocent, meaning only "dashing" or "jaunty." 
rambunctious: (adj) [ram-bungk-shus] Rambunctious means "extremely boisterous, hard to manage" and/or "noisy and overactive," depending on the context. From Icelandic intensive prefix ram- (very) plus bumptious (irritatingly self-assertive).
rancor: (n) [rangk-ur] Rancor is bitter, rankling resentment and ill will. From Lat Latin rancor (rancidity, and by extension, grudge) based on rancere (to be rancid, to stink).
rankle: (vb) [rangk-ul] To rankle is to cause lasting, bitter resentment and annoyance. An insult may rankle within you for days and days. Rankle can take a direct object.
rapacious: (adj) [ruh-pay-shis] A rapacious person is greedy, grasping, ready to seize whatever he can. From Latin, a form of rapix (greedy), based on rapere (to seize, snatch), which also gave us rape.
rapt: (adj) [rapt] When you are rapt, you are absorbed and enraptured. When people are rapt in transcendental meditation, nothing disturbs them. A brilliant lecturer can keep his audience in rapt attention. Rapt gave us the word rapture.
recalcitrant: (adj) [rih-kal-sih-trint] A person who resists authority and is hard to deal with or unmanageable is recalcitrant. The southern states were recalcitrant in insisting on their right to continue slavery. From Latin, a form of recalcitrare (of a horse-- to kick back; figuratively, to deny access).
recant: (vb) [rih-kant] To recant something is to disavow it. Joan of Arc refused to recant her visions. From Latin recantare (to recall, recant).
recapitulate: (vb) [ree-kuh-pitch-uh-layt] To recapitulate is to summarize. At the end of any long and complicated presentation, especially an oral one, it is advisable to recapitulate for the benefit of one's audience. 
recidivism: (n) [rih-sid-uh-viz-um] This word means "repeated, habitual backsliding, relapse," especially into criminal, antisocial or other undesirable behavior. From Latin recidere (to fall back).
reclusive: (adj) [rih-kloo-siv] A reclusive person is one who prefers to live alone, avoiding social contact. Reclusive persons tend to become forgotten and ignored by society.
recondite: (adj) [rek-un-dyt] Anything recondite is hard to understand, profound, requiring high intelligence to grasp. Applicants for the degree of Ph.D. often write recondite treatises, never read except by the examiners. From Latin reconditus, a form of Latin recondere (to hide).
reconnoiter: (vb) [rek-uh-noy-tur] This term started out, and still comes to mind, as a type of military maneuver, to inspect the terrain and get as much information as possible about the strength, position, etc. of enemy forces. It is used quite generally, however, to express the idea of exploring any situation where advance information might be useful. 
rectify: (vb) [rek-tuh-fy] To rectify something is to correct it, to put it right. Based on Latin rectus (correct). 
rectitude: (n) [rek-tih-tood] Rectitude is righteousness, the strict observance of integrity and adherence to a high moral code. The word has occasionally been used to mean "correctness of judgement." 
redolent: (adj) [red-uh-lint] Redolent means "smelling of," when the adjective is followed by a description of the source of the odor, or "sweet-smelling" when the fragrance is self-evident. From Latin redolere (to emit an odor, smell of).
redoubtable: (adj) [rih-dowt-uh-bul] Redoubtable means "formidable," especially with reference to an adversary. 
redress: (n, vb) [rih-dress] Redress is the setting right of something that is wrong. Full back pay is the usual form of redress to one who has been wrongfully suspended from his job without pay. From Middle English redressen, taken from Old French redrecier, based on drecier (to straighten).
refractory: (adj) [rih-frak-tuh-ree] A refractory person is difficult or impossible to manage, stubbornly resistant to authority. When a metal is described as refractory, it means it has a high melting-point and is hard to fuse or work. From Latin refragari (to oppose, thwart). 
refulgent: (adj) [rih-ful-jint] Anything refulgent is radiant, shining, glowing. From Latin refulgere (to shine brightly).
regale: (vb) [rih-gayl] To regale someone is to entertain him lavishly, or to amuse or delight him, depending on the context. From French regaler (to regale), based on Old French regale (feast).
rejoinder: (n) [rih-join-dur] A rejoinder is an answer to a reply. As a legal term, rejoinder goes one step further- it is a defendant's answer to a plaintiff's reply.
remand: (vb) [rih-mand] This word has the general meaning of "to order back." It is almost exclusively found in legal usage. It is used most frequently when a prisoner or suspect is sent back into detention. Another legal usage is in connection with appeals- The appeals court remanded the case to the lower court. From Late Latin remandare (to repeat a command).
remonstrate: (vb) [rih-mahn-strayt not rem-un-strayt] One remonstrates when one is pleading in protest against something, presenting arguments in opposition to something. It is usually a waste of energy to remonstrate with a confirmed smoker against his dangerous addiction. 
renegade: (n) [ren-uh-gayd] A renegade is one who deserts his own party, group, country, etc., to join another, usually the enemy or rival. The term also covers those who desert one religious faith for another. When religion is concerned, it is the equivalent of apostate. From Latin negare (to deny).
renege: (vb) [rih-neg] In general usage, this word means "to break a promise, to go back on one's word." Nations have been known to renege on their promises not to violate a neighbor's borders.
repartee: (n) [rep-ur-tee] Repartee is conversation full of fast, witty replies, quick comebacks. From French repartie (retort).
repertoire: (n) [rep-ur-twar] The term repertoire applies to a collection or list of works, dramatic, operatic, musical, etc., which a company or performer can perform and which make up the artist's or company's "stock in trade." Repertory is sometimes used in place of repertoire, but its use is better confined to describe theatrical performances of different plays, for relatively short periods, performed in sequence by the same company. Repertory is occasionally used to mean "supply" or "store." 
replete: (adj) [rih-pleet] Anything replete with something is full of it. Replete is usually followed by with. From Latin replere (to fill).
reprehensible: (adj) [rep-ruh-hen-suh-bul] Reprehensible conduct is blameworthy, deserving of censure. Yellow journalism is reprehensible beyond words for the misery it can bring about. From Latin reprehendere (to censure, reprove).
reprobate: (n, adj) [rep-ruh-bayt] A reprobate is an unprincipled person. This word seldom appears as an adjective. From Late Latin reprobatus, a form of reprobare (to reprove).
reprove: (vb) [rih-prove] When you reprove someone, you are scolding him, not necessarily severely. The verb is used especially when the scolding is done with a view to correcting a fault of behavior and is close in meaning to "rebuke." It is far more effective for teachers and other disciplinarians to reprove rather than to punish young people for lack of effort.
resolute: (adj) [rez-uh-loot] A resolute person is one with unshakable determination, firm, determined, steadfast. From Latin resolutus, a form of resolvere (to resolve).
reticent: (adj) [ret-ih-sint] A reticent person is reserved, inclined to keep quiet. From Latin reticens, a form of reticere (to keep silent), based on tacere (to be silent).
retrograde: (adj) [reh-truh-grayd] Retrograde means "with a reverse or backward motion," sometimes "in inverse order." From Latin retro (backward) and gradi (to step). The related verb to retrogress means "to go backward," but usually in an abstract sense.
retrospective: (adj) [reh-truh-spek-tiv] Retrospective means "looking back into the past." From Latin retro (backward) and specere (to look).
rhetoric: (n) [ret-uh-rik not ree-tor-ik] In current usage, rhetoric is the art of using language effective. Rhetoric covers both the study of effective prose and the ability to use it. Rhetorical is the related adjective with several meanings. First, "mainly for effect." Next, "bombastic." Finally, in the phrase rhetorical question, describing a question in form only, really a statement not expecting a reply.
ribald: (adj) [rib-uld] This word applies to persons given to vulgar or indecent humor, or to humor of that sort itself. Ribaldry means "ribald speech or humor." From Middle English ribaud (lewd person).
rife: (adj) [rife] Rife means "present in abundance, in widespread existence." 
rigors: (n, pl) [rig-urz] Rigors has a perfectly good singular, rigor, meaning "severity, strictness," but is commonly used in the plural to describe the harshness or severity of weather or climate, or of a particular way of life or activity. The adjective can be used in a number of ways. It can mean "harsh, severe." Another meaning is "accurate, precise." Referring to climate or weather it means "extremely severe, harsh, inclement." From Latin rigor (literally, stiffness; figuratively, severity).
riposte: (n) [rih-post] A riposte is a swift, sharp reply, especially to a challenging or insulting question. The term is taken from fencing, where a riposte is a quick thrust in response to an opponent's lunge. 
risible: (adj) [riz-uh-bul] Although this word, in a general sense describes anything pertaining to laughter, its usual meaning is "laughable," or more strongly, "ludicrous." From Latin ridere (to laugh).
roue: (n) [roo-ay] A roue is an immoral, dissolute man, a debauchee or rake, especially one who has seduced many women and dropped them for new conquests. Roue is taken over intact from French, where it is a form of rouer (to break on the wheel-- a technique of torture).
rubicund: (adj) [roo-bih-kund] Rubicund, meaning "ruddy," is usually found in the description of a complexion, almost always a male's. 
rue: (vb) [roo] To rue is to regret deeply, to wish something hadn't happened and could be undone. Looking back, we rue our first involvement in the affairs of Vietnam. 
ruminate: (vb) [roo-mih-nayt] To ruminate is to think something over, slowly and thoroughly; to chew over a thought or problem, with concentrated attention, to ponder. People often ruminate long and hard before throwing away a pile of old letters. The literal meaning of ruminate is "to chew the cud," and animals (cows, deer, camels) that do so are called "ruminants." 
sacrosanct: (adj) [sak-roh-sankt] Anything sacrosanct is extremely sacred, inviolable. Literally, this word would be applied to temples, churches, altars, etc., but its most frequent use is figurative, in a nonreligious sense. From Latin sacrosanctus (sacred, inviolable; literally, made sacred by a holy rite).
sagacity: (n) [suh-gas-ih-tee] Sagacity is keen judgement, farseeing wisdom. Sagacity in a judge is as important as his knowledge of the law. From Latin sagax (keen, acute).
salacious: (adj) [suh-lay-shis] What is salacious is lewd, not merely erotic. This word describes anything obscene, whether conduct or writing, painting, etc. From Latin salax (lustful- in its literal use, applied to male animals), a word related to salire (to jump).
salient: (adj) [say-lee-int] Things that are salient are outstanding, conspicuous- they leap to the eye and are therefore important, noticeable. From Latin salire (to spring, leap).
salubrious: (adj) [suh-loo-bree-us] Salubrious means "health-giving, healthful, wholesome." From Latin salubris (healthful).
salutary: (adj) [sal-yuh-tair-ee] What is salutary is healthful, or generally beneficial. A regimen of exercise and diet has a salutary effect on the mind as well as the body. From Latin salutaris (healthful).
salvo: (n) [sal-voh] A salvo is a burst of gunfire, all at once or in rapid succession; a load of bombs dropped simultaneously or one after the other; a broadside, especially in sea battles, from many guns; sometimes, a military salute from a number of guns. Metaphorically, the use of the word has been extended to cover a a burst of applause or laughter. From Latin salve (hail!).
sanctify: (vb) [sangk-tih-fy] To sanctify something is to render it sacred or holy, to consecrate it. From Church Latin sanctificare (to make holy).
sanctimonious: (adj) [sangk-ih-moh-nee-us] A sanctimonious person or air is hypocritically pious, "holier than thou." This word is a pejorative to describe a person who makes a great show of being super-religious and exceedingly righteous. 
sang-froid: (n) [sahng-fwah] This word is French for "cold blood." It signifies a cool head, calm and composure in a situation where most people would lose theirs. 
sanguine: (adj) [sang-win] To be sanguine is to be optimistic, confidently hopeful. From Latin sanguineus (bloody), it meant, originally, "full of blood," therefore ruddy-complexioned, thus (apparently) showing good humor. 
sapient: (adj) [say-pee-int] Sapient means "wise," and sapience means "wisdom." Both are often used ironically. From Latin sapere (to be wise).
sardonic: (adj) [sar-don-ik] A sardonic smile or remark is sneeringly sarcastic, with overtones of scorn or bitter mockery- a sardonic expression is derisive. 
sartorial: (adj) [sar-tor-ee-ul] This is the adjective used to describe anything pertaining to clothing, dress, style (particularly to men's attire). Top corporate executives are, as a rule, extremely attentive to sartorial details. From Latin sartor (tailor).
saturnine: (adj) [sat-ur-nyn] A saturnine person is gloomy, taciturn, and sluggish. Misanthropes habitually wear a surly, saturnine expression. Saturnine was originally an astrological term, applied to those born under the sign of Saturn, and therefore, according to old superstition, taciturn, gloomy, and forbidding. 
savoir-faire: (n) [sahv-wahr-fair] Tact, polish, wide knowledge of the ways of the world, and of how to behave in any company and in any situation-- these are the attributes of a person with savoir-faire. Savoir faire is a French phrase meaning "to know how to do," or more freely, "to know how to act." 
savor: (n, vb) [say-vur] As a noun, savor means "taste" or "smell," nearly always in a favorable sense. As a verb, savor can mean "to enjoy the taste or smell of (something)," or "to taste or smell like (something)." The adjective savory is always complimentary. From Latin sapor (taste).
saw: (n) [saw] A saw is a well known saying or proverb, a wise adage. 
scabrous: (adj) [skab-rus] This word has a variety of meanings, and it is not always easy to see the relationship between them. First, "having a rough surface." Next, "knotty, difficult, tricky." Next, "risque, obscene." Finally, "depraved of manners, behaving indecently." 
schism: (n) [sihz-uhm] A schism is a split or division into opposing factions caused by disagreement on matters of doctrine or policy. From Greek schizein (to cut, to cleave).
scion: (n) [sy-ihn] A scion is a descendant, usually a son of a noble or "important" family; rarely applied to a female. 
scourge: (n, vb) [skurj] A scourge, literally, is a whip used for severe punishment, but its common use is to describe a person or thing considered to be a great affliction or source of heavy punishment or damage. The verb follows the literal noun meaning, "to flog with a whip"; figuratively, it means "to afflict, punish, or criticize severely." From Late Latin excoriare (to flay).
scurrilous: (adj) [skur-ih-lus] A scurrilous attack (the usual phrase) is one that is nastily, grossly insulting and abusive. The word can also mean "coarsely humorous." From Latin scurrilis (mocking, jesting).
scuttle: (n, vb) [skut-ul] Apart from its usual noun and verb meanings, a scuttle is a small hatch in the deck, side, or bottom of a boat; and the verb means to "open the seacocks of a vessel in order to sink it." That is its literal meaning, but is now more often used figuratively meaning "to destroy," deliberately and completely, in a fairly short time. 
seamy: (adj) [seem-ee] Literally, seamy means "showing the seams," like the inside of a garment; therefore, rough and not meant to be seen; now heard only on the figurative sense of "disagreeable" or "sordid." 
secular: (adj) [sek-yuh-lur] Secular can mean either "worldly" (as opposed to spiritual, sacred, or religious) or "lay" (in the sense of nonclerical). From Latin saeculum (literally, one generation; in a wider sense, the longest a person can live-- a hundred years, i.e., a century). Secular is synonymous with temporal. 
seminal: (adj) [sem-ih-nul] Literally and technically, seminal means "containing, or pertaining to, semen." In botany, it means "pertaining to seed." In general use, seminal has a figurative sense of "original," with the clear implication that whatever is to described is likely to give rise to future growth and development-- nearly always in a favorable way. From Latin semen (seed).
sententious: (adj) [sen-ten-shus] A sententious person is too fond of putting on a show of wisdom, especially in the form of sage maxims and truisms, and usually in a smug and righteous manner. From Latin sentenia (way of thinking, opinion).
sentient: (adj) [sen-shint not sen-tee-int] A sentient being is one capable of perceiving and feeling by means of the senses. In science fiction, all sorts of planets are inhabited by sentient being equipped with all sorts of sensory organs. From Latin sentiens, a form of sentire (to feel).
septic: (adj) [sep-tik] Anything that causes or has to do with infection by microorganisms may be described as septic. The word is often found in the term septic tank, into which sewage is conveyed and which makes use of bacteria and decompose it. From Greek septikos based on septos (rotten). Do not confuse septic with sceptic (a variant spelling of skeptic).
sequel: (n) [see-kwul] A sequel is a follow-up of either an event, an action, or a work or literature, film, etc. Sequel can be used as well in the sense of "consequence, result." From Latin sequela (that which follows), based on sequi (to follow).
sequester: (vb) [sih-kwest-ur] To sequester is to remove and keep separate; most commonly a matter of legal usage. From Late Latin sequestrare (to set aside, for safekeeping), based on sequester (depositary, one appointed to hold property pending a dispute).
serendipity: (n) [serr-in-dip-ih-tee] Serendipity is the making of a pleasant discovery by accident, the good luck of finding something agreeable that you weren't looking for, especially when you were looking for something else. This word was coined by English writer Horace Walpole, based on a Persian fairy tale entitle The Three Princes of Serendip, who kept having such adventures.
serpentine: (adj) [sur-pin-teen] Anything serpentine is curved and sinuous, shaped like a snake. Some rivers run in a relatively straight line; most wend their serpentine way though the countryside or town. From Latin serpentinus (snakelike).
servile: (adj) [sur-vul] A servile person is slavish, submissive, cringing. From Latin servilis (slavish), based on servus (slave).
shibboleth: (n) [shib-uh-lehth] A shibboleth, originally a peculiarity of speech or a custom or usage distinctive of a particular group, is a catchword or slogan characteristic of a party or sect. It has come to mean any such slogan empty of real meaning, an outworn bit of dogma. Shibboleths reveal your origins, good or bad, but the word has a generally pejorative meaning. 
sibilant: (adj) [sih-uh-lint] A sibilant sound is a hissing sound. The word is nearly always used to describe a sound uttered in human speech, like the letter s. When people have a gap between their two front teeth, their conversation may be notable for its wealth of sibilants. A hissing snake makes a sibilant sound. From Latin sibilans, a form of sililare (to hiss, whistle).
simile: (n) [sim-uh-lee] A figure of speech that compares two things using the world like or as. From Latin similis (like, similar).
sinecure: (n) [sin-uh-kyoor] This is the word for a job or appointment requiring little or no actual work, though paying a salary or other compensation (especially if it pays well). From two Latin words, sine cura (without care).
sinuous: (adj) [sin-yoo-us] Sinuous means "very curved, winding, undulating." In the dark or in a fog it is very difficult to drive along a sinuous road. From Latin sinus (curve). 
skeptic: (n) [skehp-tik] Originally, this word has the name of a member of an ancient Greek philosophical school that denied that man could ever know anything with certainty. Now it applies to anyone who makes a practice of doubting and insists on examining all beliefs, including widely accepted ones. Taken from Greek skeptikos (thoughtful, of an inquiring mind).
skittish: (adj) [skit-ish] Skittish means "frisky, extremely lively," with the implication of nervous readiness to be triggered into action. This word is associated with horses, and in that connection implies that the animal is easily startled. 
slake: (vb) [slake] To slake is to quench, and the most common use of the word is in the expression to slake one's thirst. Its more general meaning is "to allay" by doing something that satisfies the situation. A soft answer can slake someone's wrath. Slake has a special use with respect to lime- it describes the treatment of lime with water, causing disintegration, resulting in slaked lime. It is called "slaked" because the water treatment makes the lime inactive.
slew: (n, vb) [sloo] As a noun, a slew of anything is a lot of it, an abundance, "oceans." In this use, slew is an informal word. As a verb, slew is a variant of the more common form slue, and in that sense it means "to swing around," usually on one's own axis, with the implication that the swinging is done in haste. 
smug: (adj) [smuhg] A smug person is self-satisfied, especially to a degree or in a manner that irritates others. 
sobriquet: (n) [soh-brih-kay] A sobriquet is an assumed name or nickname. 
sodden: (adj) [sod-in] Sodden describes the condition of utter saturation, the ultimate degree of wetness, usually with unpleasant implications. A special use of the word is found in the expression sodden drunk, which is about as drunk as you can get. 
solecism: (n) [sahl-ih-siz-um] This is a useful term for any erroneous or ignorant use of words, whether the error relates to grammar, usage, or pronunciation. By extension, solecism can include any breach of good manners. Do not confuse solecism with solipsism. 
soliloquy: (n) [suh-lil-uh-kwee] A soliloquy is a speech, usually in a play, expressing a person's thoughts aloud and addressed to no one in particular. Based on Latin solus (alone) and loqui (to speak).
solipsism: (n) [sahl-ip-siz-um] Technically, solipsism is a term in philosophy covering the theory that only the self exists or can be demonstrated to exist, because we all can know the word is what we can get through our own five senses. By extension, solipsism has come to mean "self-centeredness." From Latin solus (alone) and ipse (himself).
sop: (n) [sahp] Literally, a sop is something like a piece o bread soaked in a palatable liquid like sugar-water or broth, given to a baby, for instance, to pacify it. Figuratively, and now more often, the term covers anything given, such as a trivial bribe or concession, to keep someone or something appeased or quiet for the time being. 
sophism: (n) [sahf-iz-um] A sophism is a specious statement or argument made to deceive someone; one that sounds plausible but is actually a clever distortion of the facts. In ancient Greece the Sophists were a class of instructors in various branches of learning who eventually began to learn more to finding ingenious methods of reasoning and quibbling than to sound, sincere logic. 
sophomore: (n) [sahf-uh-mor] Most of us know that sophomore is a second-year student in high school or college. The adjective sophomoric, however, is used to describe the intellectual pretensions and overconfidence of the typical sophomore who thinks he knows a lot more than he actually does. From Greek sophos (wise) and moros (foolish).
soporific: (n, adj) [sahp-uh-rif-ik] The adjective means "sleep-producing," and the noun means "sleep-producing drug." From Latin sopor (sleep) and suffix -ficus (-making), i.e., sleep-making. 
soupcon: (n) [soop sahn] This is the French word for "suspicion." In English it means the very merest dash, trace, or hint of something, usually said of a flavor in cooking. 
spate: (n) [spayt] A spate is a sudden outpouring, of overwhelming proportions. It can be applied literally to a huge and unexpected rush of liquid, like a flash flood, but in general use it can describe an outpouring of almost anything.
spleen: (n) [spleen] A spleen is an important organ of the body, acting on the blood, and once believed to be the seat of melancholy and ill humor. In common speech, spleen has come to describe spiteful bad temper. 
sporadic: (adj) [spuh-rad-ik] This word describes anything occurring here and there, now and then; occasional, scattered. Success requires sustained efforts; sporadic bursts of energy are often a waste of time. 
spurious: (adj) [spyoor-ee-us] What is spurious is counterfeit, not authentic, not the genuine article, phony. 
squalid: (adj) [skwahl-id] Miserably dirty and unpleasant, usually from neglect or poverty, wretched, sordid. In shocking proximity to the splendid homes of the rich, we often find slums so squalid as to jolt our consciences.
stentorian: (adj) [sten-tor-ee-in] A stentorian voice is extremely loud and penetrating. Stentor was a Greek herald during the time of the Trojan War. Homer (eighth century B.C.) says in The Iliad that Stentor's voice was equivalent to that of fifty men combined. Top sergeants are known for their stentorian voices.
stolid: (adj) [stahl-id] A stolid person is unemotional, impassive, unexcitable, unresponsive, not easily roused. From Latin stolidus (stupid, dull, obtuse).
strident: (adj) [stryd-int] Anyone or anything strident is loud and harsh, grating, creaking. Strident sounds are harsh and shrill, insistent and discordant. From Latin stridere (to make a harsh noise).
stultify: (vb) [stul-tih-fy] To stultify someone's mind is to make it dull, ineffectual, torpid, especially by long and boring work or a boring environment. Monotonous menial labor is stultifying. From Latin stultus (stupid).
sublimate: (vb) [sub-lih-mayt] To sublimate is to transform impulses, feelings, etc., leading to forbidden behavior, usually sexual, into socially acceptable activity; the process being generally unconscious, and f or the purpose of avoiding censure, punishment, or guilty feelings. In chemistry, to sublimate is to vaporize right from the solid state, without first liquefying. From Latin sublimare (to elevate).
sub rosa: (adj, adv) [sub-roh-zuh] These are two Latin words which mean, literally, "under the rose." In Roman times, hanging a rose over the table, at a secret meeting, was a symbol that the participants were sworn to secrecy. The expression is applied particularly to actions that must be hidden from the public eye. 
succor: (n, vb) [suk-ur] Succor is help, aid, usually with the implication that one is coming to rescue somebody from a fairly dangerous and wretched predicament. From Latin succerrere (to come to the aid of).
succulent: (adj) [suk-yuh-lint] Literally, succulent means "juicy," usually as applied to food and often with the sense of "appetizing." In botany, a succulent plant is one that, like cactus and other desert plants, is provided with thick, porous tissues that can store up water. From Latin succus (juice).
succumb: (vb) [suh-kum] To succumb is to yield, give way. One can succumb to a disease, a mood, persuasion, an adversary, etc. From Latin succumbere (to yield, fall down).
sully: (vb) [sul-ee]To sully is to stain, blemish. Even though groundless, and later publicly retracted, a scurrilous newspaper story can sully a reputation forever. From Middle French souiller (to soil), which also gave us soil. The adjective unsullied is the equivalent of "spotless, immaculate."
supercilious: (adj) [soo-pur-sil-ee-us] A supercilious person is haughty and contemptuous of supposed inferiors, disdainful, arrogantly superior. From Latin superciliosus, based on supercilium (literally, eyebrow; figuratively, arrogance).
supine: (adj) [soo-pyn] Supine can be used in its literal sense of "lying on one's back, face up" (the opposite of prone), or in its figurative sense of "passive," to describe a person who does not react in the fact of provocation, threat of danger, etc. Used in this latter sense it is a pejorative, implying that to behave supinely is wrong, and sometimes even cowardly. 
supplicate: (vb) [sup-lih-kayt] To supplicate is to beg, beseech, petition humbly and prayerfully. It is not uncommon for a lawyer to supplicate a judge for compassion toward a first offender. From Latin supplicate (to kneel, beseech).
surfeit: (n, vb) [sur-fit] A surfeit of anything is an excess of it, especially of food or drink. This word is sometimes applied to the sensation of disgust and distress caused by such excess. To surfeit is to supply (someone) with an excess of something. From Middle French surfait, from surfaire (to overdo).
surmise: (n, vb) [sur-myz] To surmise is to suppose, without certain knowledge, to infer on scanty evidence. Intuitive people often learn that whey they had formerly surmised turns out to be the truth. It is always risky to surmise another's thoughts. A surmise is a belief based on slight evidence, a conclusion with no firm basis. From Latin supermittere (to throw upon).
surreptitious: (adj) [sur-up-tish-us] Surreptitious means "stealthy, clandestine." From Latin surrepticius (stolen -- cf. the familiar phrase stolen glances).
sybarite: (n) [sib-uh-rite] A sybarite is a person who lives mainly for pleasure and luxury, a sensualist or voluptuary-- often with the implication that he can afford not to work for a living. The term comes from the ancient Greek city of Sybaris, in the south of Italy, noted for the luxurious ways of its inhabitants. 
sycophant: (n) [sik-uh-fint] A sycophant is a flatterer, a most unpleasant type, a self-seeking, servile, snivelling hanger-on, a toady. Sudden fame attracts sycophants. 
sylph: (n) [silf] A sylph is a slim, graceful girl. Originally the term was applied to an imaginary soulless creature who inhabited the air. The word is most frequently met with in the adjective sylphlike. 
symbiosis: (n) [sim-by-oh-sis] Symbiosis is the term for the living together of two different organisms which creates a mutually advantageous situation. The adjective that describes such an arrangement is symbiotic. From Greek sym- (variant of syn- together) and bios (life).
syntax: (n) [sin-taks] This term covers both sentence structure and the study of the formation of sentences; the branch of grammar that deals with the arrangement of words in a sentence. From Greek syntassein (to put in order, arrange).
synthesis: (n) [sin-thuh-sis] Synthesis is the combining of elements to create a whole. It can apply to the combining of chemical elements to create a compound, and has a special application to the production of a substance that may or may not occur in nature. It is by no means limited to chemistry. 
tacit: (adj) [tas-it] What is tacit is understood without being expressed in so many words; understood, implied (by the circumstances, or by silence). From Latin tacitus, a form of tacere (to be silent).
taciturn: (adj) [tas-ih-turn] A taciturn person is uncommunicative, inclined to keep silent; the opposite of voluble or garrulous or loquacious, not disposed to participate in conversation. From Latin tacere (to be silent).
tactile: (adj) [tak-tul] Tactile describes anything pertaining to or using the sense of touch, or anything perceptible to touch, i.e., tangible. The Braille system was created as a means of tactile communication of written words and symbols for the sightless. From Latin tangere (to touch).
tangential: (adj) [tan-jen-chul] Anything tangential is a deviation or digression from the main point or subject; it wanders or strays off from the real or basic issue. The word can also mean "incidental," to describe something that touches only lightly on another subject; it is based on the meaning of tangent in geometry. 
tangible: (adj) [tan-jih-bul] Literally, tangible describes anything that can be felt, perceived by touch; but has been extended, in its normal use, to mean "actual, substantial," (rather than imaginary), "definite" (as opposed to vague). In law, especially in the phrase tangible assets, the adjective describes those things that have an actual physical being.
tautology: (n) [taw-tahl-uh-jee not toh-tahl-uh-jee] Tautology is the unnecessary use of words that merely repeat a thought and perform no other function, words that add nothing by way of additional information or clarification. Examples- an inexperienced beginner, a hot scorcher of a day, a widow woman. It is tautological to speak of a patriot who loves his country or a novice who has just started. From Greek tauto (the same) plus logos (word).
tawdry: (adj) [taw-dree] Anything tawdry is cheap, showy, and gaudy, without real value or taste, while trying to appear elegant- often implying a pathetic attempt to seem better off than one is, without the necessary money or taste to bring it off. 
tedious: (adj) [tee-dee-us] Tedious means "boring." From Latin taedium (boredom).
temerity: (n) [tuh-mair-ih-tee] Temerity is rashness, reckless lack of fear, unthinking boldness, foolhardiness, especially when motivated by an underestimation or disregard of consequences. From Latin temeritas (blind chance, accident, rashness).
temporal: (adj) [tem-puh-rul] Like its synonym secular, temporal can mean either "worldly" (as opposed to spiritual), or "nonclerical." From Latin temporalis (temporary-- as opposed to eternal).
tendentious: (adj) [ten-den-shus] Anyone or anything tendentious is biased, tending to favor a particular cause or point of view. Newspaper reporters can be quite tendentious under the guise of objective journalism. From Latin tendere (to tend, be inclined).
tenet: (n) [ten-it] A tenet is a belief, an opinion, doctrine, position on a given matter, held as true. From Latin tenet (he holds), a form of tenere (to hold).
tenuous: (adj) [ten-yoo-us] Literally, tenuous means "very thin" in either form or consistency, but by extension it has come to mean "of little substance," "thin" in the sense of "not convincing, little validity." From Latin tenuis (thin, slight).
terse: (adj) [turce] Terse means "concise, brief, short and sweet," as applied to speech or writing. From Latin tersus (clean, neat), adjective taken from a form of tergere (to wipe, cover, clean).
testy: (adj) [tes-tee] A testy person is impatient, irritable, easily annoyed and quick to show it, equipped with a short fuse. From Middle English testif (headstrong).
timorous: (adj) [tim-uh-rus] Timorous is a somewhat stronger word for timid, implying a higher degree of fear and uncertainty, and a consciousness of weakness in the face of danger. From Latin timor (fear).
titular: (adj) [tich-uh-lur] Titular means "having a title but without real authority." From Latin titulus (title or honor).
toady: (n, vb) [toh-dee] A toady is an obsequious flatterer who fawns on someone and caters to his every whim in order to get into or stay in favor. Toady is formed from toad in its figurative sense of "object of aversion." 
torpid: (adj) [tor-pid] A torpid person or animal or mind is slow, sluggish, lacking in vigor, apathetic, dull. From Latin torpidus (numb).
tortuous: (adj) [tor-choo-us] This word describes anything, like a road or path, that is full of twists and turns; figuratively, it means "devious, not straightforward." From Latin tortuous (full of turns and windings). Do not confuse tortuous with torturous.
traduce: (vb) [truh-dooce] To traduce is to slander, malign, vilify, accuse falsely of some base action. From Latin traducere (to expose).
transcend: (vb) [tran-send] To transcend is to exceed, surpass, rise above, go beyond. This word is nearly always used in a favorable sense. From Latin transcendere (to climb over).
travesty: (n) [trahv-uh-stee] A travesty is, literally, a comic imitation of a serious work of art, generally a literary or dramatic work, poking fun at it; in this sense, travesty has about the same meaning of burlesque. By extension, it is used to denote any grotesque or degraded imitation. From French travesti (disguised), based on Latin trans (across, to the other side of) plus vestire (to dress).
tremulous: (adj) [trem-yuh-lus] One who is tremulous is trembling with nervousness or timidity. The word often describes someone who is nervously hesitant about saying or doing something, or fearful of some imminent event.
trenchant: (adj) [tren-chint] Originally, trenchant means "cutting, sharp," but it is now used only in its figurative sense of "forceful, incisive, effective," sometimes even "caustic." From Old French trenchier (to cut).
trepidation: (n) [trep-ih-day-shin] Trepidation is anxious uncertainty, fear and anxiety, nervous agitation. From Latin trepidus (anxious).
truculent: (adj) [truk-yuh-lint] A truculent person is aggressively hostile, belligerent, ready to fight or take offense on very small provocation, defiant. Originally, it meant "brutal, fierce, ferocious," but this use is seldom heard now. From Latin truculentus (rough, ferocious).
truism: (n) [troo-iz-um] A truism is a statement so obviously true as to seem hardly necessary to put into words; something one would think everyone would have to agree with, without argument. Most truisms are hackneyed. 
truncate: (vb) [trung-kayt] To truncate is to shorten by cutting off an end or cutting out a part. It is usually heard in the form of the adjective truncated, meaning "shortened," but almost always in the figurative sense of "incomplete." From Latin truncare (to shorten by cutting off, to mutilate).
turgid: (adj) [tur-jid] Turgid can be used in its literal sense of "swollen, distended," or in the figurative sense of "pompous, ostentatious, over-embellished," particularly as applied to language. 
tyro: (n) [tie-roh] A tyro is a beginner, a novice, especially in some skill or trade. From Latin tiro (recruit; by extension, novice).
ubiquitous: (adj) [yoo-bik-wih-tus] A ubiquitous person or thing is one that is everywhere at the same time (or seems to be). From Latin ubique (everywhere).
umbrage: (n) [um-brij] Umbrage is a feeling of offense, resentment, extreme displeasure and annoyance, usually found in the expression to take umbrage, meaning "to take offense," although one can give umbrage or feel umbrage, but take is the usual verb. From Latin umbrare (to shade).
unconscionable: (adj) [un-kon-shun-uh-bul] This adjective describes actions, attitudes, etc., that are unscrupulous, not restrained by one's conscience; excessive, extreme, improper to the point of outrage; always in a bad sense. From Latin conscientia (awareness, conscience).
unctuous: (adj) [ungk-choo-ihs] A unctuous manner is oily, over-earnest and excessively considerate, overly pious. Literally, unctuous is used to describe anything actually oily or greasy, but in common usage the word implies an affectation of sincerity for an ulterior purpose, usually to ingratiate oneself in order to gain some unstated goal. Do not confuse unctuousness with unction (anointing with oil; figuratively, affected earnestness).
unfathomable: (adj) [un-fahth-um-uh-bul] Anything unfathomable is incomprehensible; something whose meaning you cannot penetrate. The word is based on the verb to fathom, meaning "to measure the depth of," and by extension, "to understand." In literal terms, a fathom is a nautical unit of measurement equalling six feet.
unflagging: (adj) [un-flag-ing] Unflagging means "untiring, persistently determined, not about to quit." The verb to flag means "to become weary, slow down from fatigue," and can be applied either to physical energy or interest.
unmitigated: (adj) [un-mit-uh-gayt-id] What is unmitigated is absolute, not modified or diminished in any degree; used almost always in a pejorative sense. 
unseemly: (adj) [un-seem-lee] Unseemly means "improper," particularly in behavior or manners; especially describing actions socially inappropriate in a specific situation. Midnight is an unseemly hour for a casual visit. 
untenable: (adj) [un-ten-uh-bul] What is untenable is impossible to defend or maintain; usually applied to theories, arguments, and positions taken. From Latin tenere (to hold).
untrammeled: (adj) [un-tram-uld] Untrammeled means "not restricted or hampered," often in the phrase free and untrammeled. Trammel is a noun whose figurative meaning is "hindrance, impediment," and the verb to trammel means "to hamper, restrain." Neither the noun nor the positive verb is at all common. A trammel net is a three-layered fishnet; trammel comes from Middle English tramail (three-mesh net), from Latin tres (three) plus macula (mesh of a net).
uxorious: (adj) [uk-sor-ee-us] An uxorious husband is one who obsessively dotes on his wife, and is slavishly submissive to her. From Latin uxor (wife).
vacillate: (vb) [vass-ih-layt] To vacillate is to waver, hesitate, be indecisive, swing back and forth between feelings or opinions, be unable to make one's mind. Originally it meant "to sway to and fro." From Latin vacillare (to totter, sway to and fro).
vacuous: (adj) [vak-yoo-us] Anyone or anything vacuous is inane, empty-headed, without substance. When applied to a face, a look, a stare, or a person's eyes, vacuous means "expressionless." From Latin vacuus (empty).
vagary: (n) [vay-guh-ree] This word, meaning "unpredictable, erratic turn of events," is almost always used in the plural. From Latin vagari (to wander, ramble). From the same source we get vagrant and vague. 
vapid: (adj) [vap-id] What is vapid is insipid, flat, dull. From Latin vapidus (spiritless, flat).
variegated: (adj) [var-ee-ih-gayt-id] This term is narrowly applied to anything marked by a variety of patchwork colors and, more generally, to things that are varied in other ways. Some common synonyms in the narrower sense are dappled, motley, partially-colored. From Latin variegare (to make [something] look varied).
vehement: (adj) [vee-uh-mint not vuh-hee-mint] Vehement means "impassioned, intensely emotional, violent, extremely forceful." 
venal: (adj) [veen-ul] A venal person is capable of being bought, susceptible to bribery. Venal public officials were the curse of the corrupt administration of Boss Tweed. From Latin venalis (for sale; by extension, venal). Do not confuse venal with venial.
veneer: (n) [vuh-neer] Literally, veneer is the term for a thin layer of finer wood laid over cheaper material in furniture, walls, etc. Figuratively, the word is used to describe a superficial show or pretense of a good quality to cover up something disreputable or undesirable. Some of the world's most notorious criminals put on a veneer of piety and respectability. 
venerate: (vb) [ven-uh-rayt] To venerate is to respect deeply, to honor as sacred or noble, to revere. This word is mostly used when describing the feelings inspired by someone or something honored and usually fairly old. 
venial: (adj) [veen-yul not vee-nee-ul] What is venial is pardonable, forgivable, not serious. This word is heard mainly in the phrase venial sin (as opposed to mortal sin- both as defined in the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church). From Latin venia (indulgence, forgiveness). Do not confuse venial with venal.
veracious: (adj) [vuh-ray-shis] When applied to a statement, veracious means "true"; applied to a person, "truthful." When a person is veracious, it means that he habitually speaks the truth. The noun, veracity, meaning "truthfulness, accuracy," is used more often than the adjective. Do not confuse veracious with voracious.
verisimilitude: (n) [vair-ih-sim-il-ih-tood] This word expresses the quality of appearing to be true or real or plausible, especially applicable to the representations of reality in fiction or painting. From Latin verisimilitudo (probability).
veritable: (adj) [vair-ih-til-bul] Something veritable is not simply true, it is absolutely and positively so, so no way to be denied. From Latin veritas (truth).
vertigo: (n) [vur-tih-goh] Vertigo is dizziness, giddiness, the feeling that one, or the world about him, is whirling about. When some people look down from a height they suffer from vertigo. Taken over intact from the Latin, where its literal meaning is "whirling around" and its figurative meaning is "giddiness." 
vicissitude: (n) [vih-sis-ih-tood] This word is almost always heard in the plural, vicissitudes, meaning the "ups and downs" of life, the unpredictable changes of fortune. Real friendships endure despite the vicissitudes of many years.
vignette: (n) [vin-yet not vig-nyet] This word was originally applied to those old photographs or portraits shaded off gradually at the edges, or to decorative designs representing branches and leaves; not commonly applied to a brief literary sketch, by itself or a larger piece. Vignette is French for "little vine." 
vilify: (vb) [vih-ih-fy] To vilify is to speak ill of, to defame, with the implication that the charge is unfair. From Latin vilis (cheap, of little value) plus -ficare, compound form of facere (to make, do).
virago: (n) [vir-ay-goh] A virago is an extremely quarrelsome, loud-mouthed, scolding shrew. From Latin virago (a man-like woman, female warrior) based on vir (man).
virtuoso: (n, adj) [vur-choo-oh-so] A virtuoso is a person of outstanding skill; a term usually applied in the field of music, but not necessarily so. The noun is virtuosity. From Latin virtus (excellence), from which we get virtue and related words.
virulent: (adj) [vir-yuh-lint] Virulent means "poisonous, extremely noxious"; medically, "highly infective"; figuratively, "violently hostile, bitter, spiteful." From Latin virus (poison).
visage: (n) [viz-ij not viz-ahzh] This term is applied to the face of a human being, usually with reference to its features, expression, or size. 
visceral: (adj) [vis-ur-ul] In its literal sense, visceral (from the noun viscera, denoting the internal organs of the body, especially the intestines) would be used in medical references, but it is far more commonly used figuratively, relating to intuitive, inward feelings, instinctive response, "gut reaction." 
vitriolic: (adj) [vih-tree-ah-lik] Vitriolic (based on oil of vitriol, which is sulphuric acid) is used commonly to mean "scathing," savagely hostile, venomously biting," usually used to describe that kind of verbal attack or attacker. 
vituperative: (adj) [vih-too-pur-uh-tiv] Anything vituperative, particularly speech or language, is harsh or abusive. The noun is vituperation and the verb is vituperate. From Latin vituperare (to blame, scold, censure).
vociferous: (adj) [voh-sif-uh-ris] Vociferous shouting is clamorous, unrestrained, insistent in expressing one's views. From Latin vociferari (to cry aloud).
voluble: (adj) [vahl-yuh-bul] A voluble person is very talkative, prone to use a great volume of words, usually a rapid talker (and not much of a listener). Voluble is the opposite of taciturn. From Latin volubilis (rapid, fluent in speech).
voracious: (adj) [vuh-ray-shis] This word has a special narrow meaning relating to food and eating- "ravenous, craving and consuming great amounts of food." In its general sense, it means "insatiable, eager to get and consume (almost anything)." From Latin vorax (gluttonous). Do not confuse voracious with veracious.
votary: (n) [voh-tuh-ree] A votary is a person devoted to a particular religion, cause, ideal, subject, pursuit, etc. More narrowly, it applied to those vowed to the service of God, like a priest, nun, or monk. In its general sense, it can denote any ardent adherent. From Latin votum (vow).
votive: (adj) [voh-tiv] Votive describes anything given in fulfillment of a pledge or vow; now most often found in the phrases votive offering and votive Mass, but applicable to other things. 
waft: (vb) [waft] To waft is to travel or carry lightly through the air. It is pleasant when the aroma of freshly cut grass wafts across the field. 
wag: (n) [wag] A wag is a roguish wit, a person given to droll humor. Waggish is the adjective, waggery is the noun for the conduct of a wag. 
wanton: (n, adj) [wahn-tun] As an adjective, wanton has a variety of uses. It can describe an act committed deliberately, without justification and maliciously. Wanton can mean "uncalled-for, willful." Another meaning is "careless, reckless." A special and frequent meaning relates to sexual morals and behavior- "loose, lewd, lascivious, and without restraint." From Middle English wantowen (ill-reared).
waspish: (adj) [wahs-pish] A waspish person is ill-tempered, sharp-tongued, ready to snap at others. It is a term that can be applied to writing or speech as well as individuals. From Latin vespa (wasp).
welter: (n, vb) [wel-tur] A welter is a condition of turmoil, wild confusion, a jumble, a muddle. The verb to welter mans "to wallow," like pigs in a muddy sty, but can be used figuratively with considerable impact. From Low German weltern (to roll).
winnow: (vb) [win-oh] To winnow something is to separate the desirable part from the worthless. Winnow can be used effectively in a figurative sense. When a job is offered, it is important to winnow the applicants' letters in order to find the most promising person for the position.
winsome: (adj) [win-sum] A winsome person is engagingly attractive, charming, usually with the implication of lightheartedness; more likely to be said of a woman than a man. The term can also be applied to appearances. A winsome smile goes a long way towards breaking the ice. 
wizened: (adj) [wiz-ind] A wizened person or face is shriveled, full of wrinkles, withered. Wizened features are a sign of age and decrepitude. From Middle English wisen (to wither). 
wont: (n, adj) [wohnt] As a noun, wont means "custom, practice." It is some people's wont to sleep all day and work all night. It has an adjectival use as well. Some people are wont to sleep all day (etc.).
wry: (adj) [rye] The original, literal meaning of this word is "twisted, distorted," and it is still used that way in the expression wry neck. It is more commonly used to describe an expression of disdainful irony. Wry humor is dry and twisted humor. Writhe is from the same source.
xenophobia: (n) [zehn-uh-foh-bee-uh] Xenophobia expresses morbid fear and distrust of strangers or foreigners, or of anything new, strange, or foreign. From Greek xenos (stranger, n., foreign, adj.), and phobos (fearing).
yen: (n) [yen] A yen is a powerful desire or craving, a longing or yearning. Overweight people find it hard to overcome their yen of fattening foods. Yen is an informal word and is thought to be derived from Cantonese word yan (craving), associated with opium. 
zealot: (n) [zel-it] A zealot is a fanatic, especially a fanatical follower of a radical cause or leader. Zeal [zeel] is the fervor that motivates a zealot, and zealous means "ardent, diligent," but neither zeal nor zealous has the force of zealot, which implies devotion beyond bounds, even at the risk of one's safety. 
